A  VEDIC  GRAMMAR 
FOR  STUDENTS 


BY 

ARTHUR   ANTHONY   MACDONELL 

M.A.,  Ph.D. 

BODEN   PKOFESSOK    OF   yAXSKRIT   IN    THE 

UMVEUSITT    OF   OXFORD 

FELLOW    OF    BALLIOL   COLLEGE  ;    FELLOW    OF   THE   BHITISU    ACADEMY ; 

FELLOW   OF   THE   KOYAL   DANI.SH   ACADEMY 


INCLUDING  A  CHAPTER  ON  SYNTAX  AND  THKEE 
APPENDIXES:  LIST  OF  VEKBS,  METEE,  ACCENT 


OXFORD 
AT   THE   CLARENDON   PRESS 

1916 


ERSITY  PRESS 

RGH      GLASGOW      NEW    YORK 
TORONTO      MELBOURNE      BOMBAY 
HUMPHREY  MILFORD 

I'UliLISHER  TO   THE   UNIVERhlTV 


PK 

M3 


PJ^EFACE 

A  PRACTICAL  Vedic  grammar  has  long  been  a  desideratum. 
It  is  one  of  the  chief  aids  to  the  study  of  the  hymns  of  the 
Veda  called  for  forty-three  years  ago  in  the  preface  to  his 
edition  of  the  Rigveda  by  Max  Miiller,  who  adds,  '  I  doubt 
not  that  the  time  will  come  when  no  one  in  India  will  call 
himself  a  Sanskrit  scholar  who  cannot  construe  the  hymns 
of  the  ancient  Rishis  of  his  country'.  It  is  mainly  due 
to  the  lack  of  such  a  work  that  the  study  of  Vedic  literature, 
despite  its  great  linguistic  and  religious  importance,  has 
never  taken  its  proper  place  by  the  side  of  the  study  of 
Classical  Sanskrit  either  in  England  or  India.  Whitney's 
excellent  Sansl-rit  Grammar,  indeed,  treats  the  earlier  lan- 
guage in  its  historical  connexion  with  the  later,  but  for  this 
very  reason  students  are,  as  I  have  often  been  assured, 
unable  to  acquire  from  it  a  clear  knowledge  of  either  the 
one  or  the  other,  because  beginners  cannot  keep  the  two 
dialects  apart  in  the  process  of  learning.  Till  the  publica- 
tion of  my  large  Vedic  Grammar  in  1910,  no  single  work 
comprehensively  presented  the  early  language  by  itself. 
That  work  is,  however,  too  extensive  and  detailed  for  the 
needs  of  the  student,  being  intended  rather  as  a  book  of 
reference  for  the  scholar.  Hence  I  have  often  been  urged 
to  bring  out  a  short  practical  grammar  which  would  do  for 
the  Vedic  language  what  my  SansJcrit  Grammar  for  Beginners 
does  for  the  Classical  language.  In  the  second  edition 
(1911)  of  the  latter  work   I  therefore   pledged    myself  to 


iv  PREFACE 

meet  this  deinand  as  soon  as  1  could.  The  present  volume 
redeems  that  pledge. 

When  planning  the  book  I  resolved,  after  much  reflection, 
to  make  it  correspond  paragraph  by  paragnxph  to  the 
SansJcrit  Grammar'  this  being  the  best  way  to  enable  students 
to  comijare  and  contrast  every  phenomenon  of  the  earlier 
and  the  later  language.  To  this  extent  the  present  book 
presupposes  the  other ;  but  it  can  quite  well  be  used  inde- 
pendently. The  exjierience  of  many  years'  teaching,  however, 
leads  me  to  dissuade  beginners  from  starting  the  study  of 
Sanskrit  by  means  of  the  present  grammar.  Students 
should,  in  my  opinion,  always  commence  with  classical 
Sanskrit,  wliich  is  more  regular  and  definite,  as  well  as 
much  more  restricted  in  the  number  of  its  inflexional  forms. 
A  good  working  knowledge  of  the  later  language  should 
therefore  be  acquired  before  taking  up  Vedic  grammar, 
which  can  then  be  rapidly  learned. 

In  carrying  out  the  parallelism  of  this  grammar  with 
the  other  I  have  experienced  a  good  deal  of  difficulty  in 
numbering  the  corresponding  paragraphs  satisfactorily, 
because  certain  groups  of  matter  are  found  exclusively  in 
the  Vedic  language,  as  the  numerous  subjunctive  forms,  or 
much  more  fully,  as  the  dozen  types  of  infinitive  compared 
with  only  one  in  Sanskrit ;  while  some  Sanskrit  formations, 
as  the  periphrastic  •  future,  are  non-exi-jtent  in  the  earlier 
language.  Nevertheless,  I  have,  I  think,  succeeded  in 
arranging  the  figures  in  such  a  way  that  the  corresponding 
paragraphs  of  the  two  grammars  can  always  be  easily 
compared.  The  only  exception  is  the  first  chapter,  con- 
sisting of  fifteen  paragra^^hs,  which  in  the  Sanslirit  Grammar 
deals  with  the  Nagarl  alphabet.  As  the  present  work 
throughout  uses  transliteration  only,  it  seemed  superfluous 
to  repeat  the  description  of  the  letters  given  in  the  earlier 
work.     I  have  accordingly  substituted  a  general  phonetic 


PREFACE  V 

survey  of  Vedic  sounds  as  enabling  the  student  to  understand 
clearly  the  linguistic  history  of  Sanskrit.  The  employment 
of  transliteration  has  been  necessary  because  by  this  means 
alone  could  analysis  by  hyphens  and  accentuation  be 
adequately  indicated.  Duplication  with  Nagarl  characters, 
as  in  the  Sanskrit  Crrammar,  would  have  increased  the  size 
and  the  cost  of  the  book  without  any  compensating  advan- 
tage. An  account  of  the  accent,  as  of  vital  importance  in 
Vedic  grammar,  would  naturally  have  found  a  place  in  the 
body  of  the  book,  but  owing  to  the  entire  absence  of  this 
subject  in  the  Sansltit  Grammar  and  to  the  fulness  which 
its  treatment  requires,  its  introduction  there  was  impossible. 
The  accent  is  accordingly  dealt  with  in  Appendix  III  as 
a  substitute  for  the  '  Chief  Peculiarities  of  Vedic  Grammar  ' 
appearing  at  the  end  of  the  Sanskrit  Grammar. 

The  term  Vedic  is  here  used  to  comprehend  not  only  the 
metrical  language  of  the  hymns,  but  also  the  prose  of 
the  Brahmanas  and  of  the  Bjahmana-like  portions  of  the 
Atharvaveda  and  of  various  recensions  of  the  Yajurveda. 
The  grammatical  material  from  the  later  period  is  mainly 
given  in  small  type,  and  is  .in  any  case  regularly  indicated 
by  the  addition  of  the  letter  B  (for  Brahmana).  Otherwise 
the  phase  of  the  earlier  language  presented  is  that  of  the 
Rigveda,  as  being  both  the  oldest  and  furnishing  the  most 
abundant  material.  But  forms  from  the  other  Vedas  are 
often  also  supplied  without  any  distinguishing  mark  as  long 
as  they  conform  to  the  standard  of  the  Eigveda.  If,  how- 
ever, such  forms  are  in  any  way  abnormal,  or  if  it  seemed 
advisable  to  point  out  that  they  do  not  come  from  the 
Rigveda,  this  is  indicated  by  an  added  abbreviation  in 
bi'ackets,  as  '  (AV.) '  for  '  (Atharvaveda).'  On  the  other  hand 
'(RV.)'  is  sometimes  added  in  order  to  indicate,  for  some 
reason  or  other,  that  a  form  is  restricted  to  the  Rigveda. 
It  is,  of  course,  impossible  to  go  much  into  detail  thus  in 


vi  PREFACE 

a  practical  work ;  IduI  the  exact  source  of  any  particular 
form  can  always  be  ascertained  by  reference  to  the  large 
Vcdic  Grammar.  The  grammatical  usage  of  the  other  Vedas, 
when  it  differs  from  that  of  the  Eigveda,  is  regularly  ex- 
plained. The  reference  is  given  with  precise  figures  when 
syntactical  examples  are  taken  from  the  Rigveda,  but  with 
abbreviations  only  (as  TS.  for  Taittirlya  Samhita  or  SB.  for 
Satapatha  Brfihmana)  when  they  come  from  elsewhere. 
Syntactical  citations  are  not  always  metrically  intact  because 
words  that  are  unnecessary  to  illustrate  the  usage  in  question 
are  often  omitted.  The  accent  in  verbal  forms  that  happen 
to  occur  in  Vedic  texts  without  it,  is  nevertheless  given 
if  its  position  is  undoubted,  but  when  there  is  any  uncer- 
tainty it  is  left  out.  In  the  list  of  verbs  (Appendix  I)  the 
third  pex'son  singular  is  often  given  as  the  typical  form  even 
when  only  other  persons  actually  occur.  Otherwise  only 
forms  that  have  been  positively  noted  are  enumerated. 

I  ought  to  mention  that  in  inflected  words  final  s,  r,  and  d 
of  endings  are  given  in  their  historical  form,  not  according 
to  the  law  of  allowable  finals  (§  27)  ;  e.g.  dutas,  not  dutah  ; 
tasmad,  not  tasmat ;  pitur,  not  pituh ;  but  when  used 
syntactically  they  appear  in  accordance  with  the  rules  of 
Sandhi ;  e.  g.  devanam  dutah  ;  vrtrasya  vadhat. 

The  present  book  is  to  a  great  extent  based  on  my  large 
Vedic  Grammar.  It  is,  howevei-,  by  no  means  simply  an 
abridgement  of  that  work.  For  besides  being  differently 
arranged,  so  as  to  agree  with  the  scheme  of  the  Sanskrit 
Grammar,  it  contains  much  matter  excluded  from  the  Vedic 
Grammar  by  the  limitations  imposed  on  the  latter  work  as 
one  of  the  volumes  of  Biihler's  Enc//cloj)aedia  of  Indo- Aryan 
Besearch.  Thus  it  adds  a  full  treatment  of  Vedic  Syntax 
and  an  account  of  the  Vedic  metres.  Appendix  I,  aiioreover, 
contains  a  list  of  Vedic  verbs  (similar  to  that  in  the  Sanslrit 
Grammar),   which  though  all  their  forms  appear  in  their 


PKEFACE  vii 

appropriate  place  within  the  body  of  the  Vedic  Grammar,  are 
not  again  presented  there  in  the  form  of  an  alphabetical  list, 
as  is  done  here  for  the  benefit  of  the  learner.  Having 
subjected  all  the  verbal  forms  to  a  revision,  I  have  classified 
some  doubtful  or  ambiguous  ones  more  satisfactorily,  and 
added  some  others  which  were  inadvertently  omitted  in  the 
large  work.  Moreover,  a  full  alphabetical  list  of  conjunctive 
and  adverbial  particles  embracing  forty  pages  and  describing 
the  syntactical  uses  of  these  words  has  been  added  in  order 
to  correspond  to  §  180  of  the  Sanskrit  Grammar.  The 
present  work  therefore  constitutes  a  supplement  to,  as  well 
as  an  abridgement  of,  the  Vedic  Grammar,  thus  in  reality 
setting  forth  the  subject  with  moi'e  completeness  as  a  whole, 
though  in  a  comparatively  brief  form,  than  the  larger  work. 
I  may  add  that  this  grammar  is  shortly  to  be  followed  by 
a  Vedic  Header  consisting  of  selected  hymns  of  the  Eigveda 
and  supplying  microscopic  explanations  of  every  point  on 
which  the  elementary  learner  requires  information.  These 
two  books  will,  I  hope,  enable  him  in  a  short  time  to  become 
an  independent  student  of  the  sacred  literature  of  ancient 
India. 

For  the  purposes  of  this  book  I  have  chiefly  exploited 
my  own  Vedic  Grammar  (1910),  but  I  have  also  utilized 
Delbriick's  Altindisclie  Syntax  (1888)  for  syntactical  material, 
and  Whitney's  Boots  (1885)  for  the  verbal  forms  of  the 
Brahmana  literature.  In  describing  the  metres  (Appen- 
dix II)  I  have  found  Oldenberg's  Die  Hymnen  des  Bigveda 
(1888),  and  Arnold's  Vedic  Metre  (1905)  very  useful. 

I  am  indebted  to  Dr.  James  Morison  and  to  my  former 
pupil,  Professor  A.  B.  Keith,  for  reading  all  the  first  proofs 
with  great  care,  and  thus  saving  me  from  many  misprints 
that  would  have  escaped  ni)^  own  notice.  Professor  Keith 
has  also  suggested  important  modifications  of  some  of  my 
grammatical     statements.      Lastly,    I    must    congratulate 


viii  PREFACE 

Mr.  J.  C.  Pembiey,  Hon.  M.A. ,  Oriental  Reader  at  the 
Clarendon  Press,  on  having  completed  the  task  of  reading 
the  final  proofs  of  this  grammar,  now  all  but  seventy  years 
after  correcting  Professor  H.  H.  Wilson's  Sanskrit  Crrammar 
in  1847.  This  is  a  record  in  the  histoi'y  of  Oriental,  and 
most  probably  of  any,  professional  proof  reading  for  the 
press. 


A.  A.  MAC  DON  ELL. 


6  Chadiington  Road,  Oxtord. 
March  30,  1916. 


CONTENTS 


PAGES 

Preface iii-viii 

List  of  Abbkeviations .  xi 

Corrections xii 

CHAPTER   I:    PHONETIC   INTKODUCTION 

Kelation  of  Veclic  to  Sanskrit— Oral  tradition  and 
Writing— Sounds  of  the  Vedic  Language — Tiie  Vowels-^ 
Vowel  Gradation —The  Consonants— Ancient  Pronuncia- 
tion      1-19 

CHAPTER   II:    EUPHONIC   COMBINATION 

External  Sandhi :  Combination  of  Vowels  and  of  Con- 
sonants—Internal Sandhi :  Combination  of  Vowels  and  of 
Consonants 20-47 

CHAPTER   III:    DECLENSION 

Nouns :  Consonant  Stems— unchangeable  — changeable  : 
with  Two  Stems;  with  Three  Stems— Vowel  Stems — 
Degrees  of  Comparison  — Numerals  :  Cardinals  ;  Ordinals  ; 
Numeral  Derivatives— Pronouns:  Personal — Demonstra- 
tive —  Interrogative  —  Relative  —  Reflexive  —  Possessive — 
Compound  —  Derivative  —  Indefinite — Pronominal  Adjec- 
tives         47-117 

CHAPTER   IV:    CONJUGATION 

Introductory— The  Present  System— First  Conjugation 
—  Second  Conjugation— The  Augment— Reduplication- 
Terminations  —  Paradigms  —  Irregularities ^ The  Perfect 
—The  Pluperfect -The  Aorist :  First  Aorist ;  Second 
Aorist—Benedictive— The  Future:  Simple;  Periphrastic 


X  CONTENTS 

PAGE 
—  Conditional— The    Passive —  Participles —  Gerund — In- 
finitive—Derivative  Verbs:     Causative  —  Desiderative — 
Intensive — Denominative 117-207 

CHAPTER  V:    INDECLINABLE    WORDS 

Prepositions — Adverbial  Case-forms — Adverbs  formed 
with  Suffixes— Conjunctive  and  Adverbial  Particles— In- 
terjections  208-253 

CHAPTER   VI:    NOMINAL   STEM   FORMATION 
AND   COMPOUNDS 

Primary  Suffixes — Secondary  Suffixes  — Gender — Verbal 
Compounds— Nominal  Compounds :  Co-ordinatives  —  Deter- 
minatives :  Dependent  and  Descriptive  —  Possessives  — 
Governing  Compounds— Syntactical  Compounds — Itera- 
tive Compounds  .........  254-282 


CHAPTER   VII:    SYNTAX 

Introductory—  Order  of  Words  -  Number  Concord — 
Pronouns  —  Use  of  the  Cases— Locative  and  Genitive 
Absolute  —  Participles — Gerund — Infinitive  —  Use  of  the 
Tenses— Use  of  the  Moods:  Imperative — Injunctive— Sub- 
junctive— Optative — Precative — Conditional 

Appendix  1.     List  of  Verbs 


Appendix  II.    Vedic  Metre 
Appendix  III.    The  Vedic  Accent 
Vedic  Index     .... 
Genekal  Index 


283-368 
369-435 
436-447 
448-469 
471-498 
499-508 


LIST   OF   ABBREVIATIONS 

A.      =  accusative  case. 

A.  =  Atmanepada,  middle  voice. 

AA.  =  Aitareya  Aranyaka. 

AB.  =  Aitareya  Brahmana. 
Ab.    =  ablative  case. 

act.  =  active  voice. 

AV.  =  Atharvaveda. 

Av.  =  Avesta. 

B.  =  Brahmana. 

C.  =  Classical  Sanskrit. 

D.  =  dative  case, 
du.  =  dual  number, 
f.  =  feminine. 

G.      =  genitive  case. 

Gk.    =  Greek. 

I.       =  instrumental  case. 

IE.    =  Indo-European. 

I-Ir.  =  Indo-Iranian. 

ind.  =  indicative  mood. 

K.      =  Kathaka  Samhita. 

KB.  =  Kausitaki  Brahmana. 

L.      =  locative  case. 

Lat.   =  Latin. 

ni.      =  masculine. 

mid.  =  middle  voice. 

MS.   =  Maitrayani  Samhita. 

N.      =  nominative  case. 

P.       =  Parasmaipada,  active  voice. 

PB.    =  Pancavirn^a  (=  Tandya)  Brahmana. 

pi.      =  plural  number. 

RV.    =  Rigveda. 

6b.    =  !§atapatha  Brahmana. 

s.        =  singular  number. 

SV.    =  Samaveda. 

TA.    =  Taittiriya  Aranyaka. 

TB.    =  Taittiriya  Bi-ahmana. 

TS.    =  Taittiriya  Samhita. 

V.       =  Vedic  (in  the  narrow  sense  as  opposed  to  B.  =  Brahmana). 

VS.    =  Vajasaneyi  Samhita. 

YV.  =  Yajurveda. 

N.B. — Other  abbreviations  will  be  found  at  the  beginning  of 
Appendix  I  and  of  the  Vedic  Index. 


COREECTIONS 

p.  25,  line  24,  fur  ami  iti  read  ami  iti.  I 

P.  27,  line  29,  lust  word,  read  d-srat. 

P.  133,  line  5,  for  bibhrm^he  read  bibhrm^he. 

P.  Hi,  line  31,  for  stride  read  strike. 

P.  156,  lines  6  and  10.  for  ei-ket-a-t  and  ci-ket-a-thas  read  of-ket-a-t 

and  ci-ket-a-thas. 
P.  158,  line  21,  for  (vas  desire)  read  (vas  bellow). 
P.  174,  lines  30  and  31,  delete  cucyuvimihi  and  cucyavirdta  (cp. 

p.  382  under  cyu). 
P.  188,  footnote,  for  'gerundive'  read  'gerund'. 
P.  200,  line  6,  for  '  f  yaj '  read  '  of  yaj '. 
P.  215,  line  32,  for  tSvan  read  tavara  ;    similarly,  pp.  220,  line  15, 

221,  line  4,  222,  line  4,  238,  line  9,  242,  line  30,  for  n  read  m. 
P.  273,  footnote,  last  line  but  one,  for  '  licietly '  read  '  chiefly '. 
P.  286,  line  15,  for  'follows'  read  'precedes'. 
P.  340,  line  17,  for  tani  read  tyani. 
P.  347,  at  the  end  of  line  10,  add  (i.  SP). 

,,     ,,     line  17,  for  va  load  va. 

,,     ,,     line  21,  for  duscarma  read  duscfirma. 
P.  348,  line  28,  for  vettu  read  vettu. 
P.  350,  line  20,  after  Kisdoin  add  (i.  42^). 
P.  351,  line  28,  for  abhi  read  abhl. 
•  352,  line  31,  for  vayum  read  vayum. 

,,     „    line  34,  for  (v.  69i)  read  (vi.  59'). 


CHAPTEE   I 
PHONETIC   INTRODUCTION 

1.  Vedic,  or  the  langiiage  of  the  literature  of  the  Vedas, 

is  represented  by  two  main  linguistic   strata,   in    each    of 

which,  again,  earlier  and  later  phases  may  be  distinguished. 

The  older  period  is  that  of  the  Mantras,  the  hymns  and 

spells  addressed   to  the  gods,   which  are  contained  in  the 

various  Samhitas.     Of  these  the  Rigveda,  which  is  the  most 

important,  represents  the  earliest  stage.      The  later  period 

is  that  of  the  prose  theological  treatises  called  Brahmanas. 

Linguistically  even  the  oldest  of  them  are  posterior  to  most 

of  the  latest  parts  of  the  Samhitas,  approximating  to  the 

stage  of  Classical  Sanskrit.     But  they  still  retain  the  use 

of  the  subjunctive  and  employ  many  different  types  of  the 

infinitive,  while  Sanskrit  has  lost  the  former  and  preserves 

only  one  single   type  of  the  latter.      The  prose    of  these 

works,  however,  to  some  extent  represents  better  than  the 

language    of   the   Mantras   the    normal   features    of   Vedic 

syntax,  which  in  the  latter  is  somewhat  interfered  with  by 

the  exigences  of  metre. 

The  language  of  the  works  forming  appendices  to  the 
Brahmanas,  that  is,  of  the  Aranyakas  and  Upanisads,  forms 
a  transition  to  that  of  the  Sutras,  which  is  practically 
identical  with  Classical  Sanskrit. 

The  linguistic  material  of  the  Rigveda,  being  more  ancient, 
extensive,  and  authentic  than  that  of  the  other  Samhitas,  all 
of  which  borrow  largely  from  it,  is  taken  as  the  basis  of 
this  grammar.  It  is,  however,  considerably  supplemented 
from  the  other  Samhitas.  The  grammatical  forms  of  the 
Brahmanas,  where  they  differ  from  those  of  Classical 
Sanskrit,  have  been  indicated  in  notes,  while  their  syntax 

1819  B 


2  PHONETIC   INTRODUCTION  [1-3 

is  fully  dealt  with,  because  it  illustrates  the  construction  of 
sentences  better  than  the  metrical  hymns  of  the  Vedas. 

2.  The  hymns  of  the  Vedas  were  composed  many  centuries 
before  the  introduction  of  writing  into  India,  which  can 
hardly  have  taken  place  much  earlier  than  600  b.  c.  They 
were  handed  down  till  probably  long  after  that  event  by 
oi'al  tradition,  which  has  lasted  down  to  the  present  day. 
Apart  from  such  tradition,  the  text  of  the  Sanihitas  has 
been  preserved  in  manuscripts,  the  earliest  of  which,  owing 
to  the  adverse  climatic  conditions  of  India,  ai*e  scarcely  five 
centuries  old.  How  soon  they  were  first  committed  to 
writing,  and  whether  the  hymns  of  the  Rigveda  were  edited 
in  the  form  of  the  Sainhita  and  Pada  texts  with  the  aid  of 
writing,  there  seems  insufficient  evidence  to  decide  ;  but  it 
is  almost  inconceivable  that  voluminous  prose  works  such 
as  the  Brahmanas,  in  particular  the  Satapatha  Brahmana, 
could  have  been  composed  and  preserved  without  such 
aid.^ 

3.  The  sounds  of  the  Vedic  language.  There  are 
altogether  fifty-two  sounds,  thirteen  of  which  are  vocalic 
and  thirty-nine  consonantal.     They  are  the  following : — 

a.  Nine  simple  vowels:  aaiiuurfl;  four  diphthongs : 
e  o  ai  au. 

I).  Twenty-two  mutes  divided  into  five  classes,  each  of 
which  has  its  nasal,  making  a  group  of  twenty-seven : 

(a)  five  gutturals  (velars) :  k  kh  g  gh  n ;  * 

(/?)  five  palatals :  e  ch  j  jh  °  n  ; 


^  The  text  of  the  Vedas,  with  the  exception  of  Aufrecht's  and 
Weber's  transliterated  editions  of  the  RV.  and  theTS.,  is  always  printed 
in  the  Devanagari  character.  The  latter  having  been  fully  described 
in  my  Sanskrit  Grammar  for  Beginners  (§§  4-14),  it  is  unnecessary  to 
repeat  what  is  there  stated.  It  will  suffice  here  to  give  a  summary 
account  of  all  the  sounds  of  the  Vedic  language. 

-  This  sound  is  very  rare,  occurring  only  once  in  the  RV.  and  not 
at  all  in  the  AV. 


3-4]  THE  VOWELS  3 

(y)  seven  cerebrals' :  t  th,  d  Jind  1,^  dh  and  Ih,^  n  ; 
{$)  five  dentals :  t  th  d  dh  n  ; 
(e)  five  labials  :  p  ph  b  bh  m  ; 

c.  Four  semivowels  :  y  (palatal),  r  (cerebral),  1  (dental), 
V  (labial)  ; 

d.  Three  sibilants  :  s  (palatal),  s  (cerebral),  s  (dental)  ; 

e.  One  aspiration  :  h  ; 

/  One  pure  nasal :  m  (m)  called  Anusvara  {after-sound), 
g.  Three   voiceless   spirants:  h   (Visarjantya),    h   (Jihva- 
midlya),  h  (Upadhrnaniya). 

4.  a.     The  simple  vowels  : 

a  ordinarily  represents  an  original  short  vowel  (IE.  a  e  6)  ; 
but  it  also  often  replaces  an  original  sonant  nasal,  represent- 
ing the  reduced  form  of  the  unaccented  syllables  an  and 
am,  as  sat-a  beside  sant-am  being ;  ga-ta  gone  beside 
a-gam-at  has  gone. 

a  represents  both  a  simple  long  vowel  (IE.  a  e  6)  and 
a  contraction ;  e.  g.  matar  (Lat.  mater)  mother ;  asam  = 
d-as-am  I  ivas.  It  frequently  also  represents  the  unaccented 
syllable  an  ;  e.  g.  kha-ta  dug  from  khan  dig. 

i  is  ordinarily  an  original  vowel ;  e,  g.  div-i  (Gk.  Sifi) 
in  heaven.  It  is  also  frequently  the  low  grade  of  e  and  ya  ; 
e.  g.  vid-ma  {i'Sfieu)  ive  Icnotv  beside  v6d-a  (oiSa)  I  Jcnoiv ; 
nav-istha  newest  beside  nav-yas  nciver.  It  also  represents  the 
low  grade  of  radical  a ;  e.  g.  ^is-ta  taught  beside  sas-ti  teaches. 

i  is  an  original  vowel ;  e.  g.  jiv-a  living.  But  it  also  often 
represents  the  low  grade  of  ya ;  e.  g.  as-i-mahi  ive  ivoidd 
attain  beside  as-yam  I  ivould  attain  ;  or  a  contraction  ;  e.  g. 
isvir  they  have  sped  (=  i-is-ur  3.  pi.  pf.  of  is) ;  mati  Tjy 
thought  {=  matia). 


1  This  is  much  the  rarest  class  of  mutes,  being  scarcely  half  as 
common  as  even  the  palatals. 

2  These  two  sounds  take  the  place  of  d  dh  respectively  between 
vowels  in  the  RV.  texts  ;  e.  g.  ile  (but  idya),  milhuse  (but  midhvan). 

e2 


4  PHONETIC   INTRODUCTION  [4 

u  is  an  original  vowel ;  e.  g.  madhu  (Gk.  fi^dv)  honey. 
It  is  also  the  low  grade  of  o  and  va  ;  e.  g.  yug-a  n.  yoJx 
beside  y6g-a  m.  yoldng ;  sup-ta  asleep  beside  svap-na  ni. 
sleep. 

u  is  an  original  vowel ;  e.  g.  bhru  {6-^pv-s:)  f.  hroio.  It  is 
also  the  low  grade  of  au  and  va  ;  e.  g.  dhu-ta  shalccn  Ijeside 
dhau-tari  f.  slialdng ;  stid  stvccten  beside  svad  enjoy ; 
and  often  represents  a  contraction;  e.g.  uc-iir  =  u -uc-iir 
they  have  spoken  (3.  pi.  pf.  of  vac) ;  bahu  the  two  arms  = 
bahu-a. 

r  is  a  vocalic  r,  being  the  low  grade  of  ar  and  ra  ;  e.  g. 
kr-ta  done  beside  ca-kar-a  I  hare  done ;  grbh-i-ta  seised 
beside  grabh-a  m.  seizure. 

T  occurs  only  in  the  ace.  and  gen.  pi.  m.  and  f.  of  ar  stems 
(in  which  it  is  the  lengthened  low  grade) ;  e.  g.  pitfn, 
matrh ;  pitrnam,  svasrnam. 

1  is  a  vocalic  1,  being  the  low  grade  of  al,  occurring  only 
in  a  few  forms  or  derivatives  of  the  verb  kip  (kalp)  he  in 
order :  caklpr6  3.  j)!.  pf.  ;  ciklpati  3.  s.  aor.  subj. ;  klpti 
(VS.)  f.  arrangement  beside  kalpasva  2.  s.  impv.  mid., 
kalp-a  m.  pious  worTc. 

b.   The  diphthongs. 

e  and  6  stand  for  the  original  genuine  diphthongs  at  au. 
They  represent  (1)  the  high  grade  corresponding  to  the 
weak  grade  vowels  i  and  u ;  e.  g.  s6c-ati  pours  beside 
Bik-ta.  poicred  ;  bhoj-am  beside  bhiij-am  aor.  of  bhuj  enjoy  ; 
(2)  the  result  of  the  coalescence  of  a  with  i  and  u  in  external 
and  internal  Sandhi ;  e.  g.  6ndra  =  a  indra  ;  6  cit  =  a  u  cit ; 
pad6  =  pada  i  du.  n.  two  steps  ;  bhaveta  =  bhava  ita  3.  s, 
opt.  might  he;  maghon  (=  magha  tm)  weak  stem  of 
maghavan  hountiful ;  T^j  e  =  az  in  a  few  words  before 
d,  dh,  h  ;  e.g.  e-dhi  he  2.  s.  impv.  of  as  beside  as-ti  ;  o  =  az 
before  bh  of  case-endings,  and  before  y  and  v  of  secondary 
suffixes ;   e.  g.   dv6so-bhis   inst.    pi.   of  dvdsas  n.    hatred ; 


4-5]  VOWEL  GRADATION  5 

duvo-yu  loisliing  to  give  (beside  duvas-yu) ;  saho-vau 
mighty  beside  sahas-vant. 

ai  and  au  etymologically  represent  ai  and  au,  as  is 
indicated  by  the  fact  that  they  become  ay  and  av  in  Sandhi ; 
e.  g.  gav-as  coivs  beside  gau-s ;  and  that  the  Sandhi  of  a 
with  e  (=  ai)  and  o  (=  au)  is  ai  and  au  respectively. 

5.  Vowel  gradation.  Simple  vowels  are  found  to  inter- 
change in  derivation  as  well  as  in  verbal  and  nominal  in- 
flexion with  fuller  syllables,  or  if  short  also  with  long  vowels. 
This  change  is  dependent  on  shift  of  accent :  the  fuller  or 
long  syllable  remains  unchanged  while  it  bears  the  accent, 
but  is  reduced  to  a  simple  or  short  vowel  when  left  by  the 
accent.  This  interchange  is  termed  vowel  gradation.  Five 
different  series  of  such  gradation  may  be  distinguished. 

a.  The  Guna  series.  Here  the  accented  high  grade 
syllables  e,  o,  ar,  al,  constituting  the  fundamental  stage 
and  called  Guna  (cp.  17  a)  by  the  native  grammarians,  inter- 
change with  the  unaccented  low  grade  syllables  i,  u,  r,  1 
respectively.  Beside  the  Guna  syllables  appear,  but  much 
less  frequently,  the  syllables  ai,  au,  ar  (al  does  not  occur), 
which  are  called  Vrddhi  by  the  same  authorities  and  may  be 
regarded  as  a  lengthened  variety  of  the  Guna  syllables. 
Examples  are  :  did6s-a  has  pointed  out :  dis-ta  pointed  out ; 
6-mi  I  go :  i-mas  ive  go ;  ap-no-mi  I  obtain :  ap-nu-mas  we 
obtain;  vdrdhaya  to  further:  vrdhaya,  id. 

a.  The  low  grade  of  both  Guna  and  Vrddhi  may  be  i,  u,  ir,  ur ;  as 
bibhay-a  I  liave  feared  ixnd  hibhAy -a,  has  feared  :  hhl-ta.  frightened  ;  juhav-a 
has  invoked :  hu-td  invoked  ;  tatar-a  has  crossed  :  tir-ate  crosses  and  tir-nd 
crossed. 

b.  The  Samprasarana  series.  Here  the  accented  high 
grade  syllables  ya,  va,  ra  (corresponding  to  the  Guna  stage 
e,  o,  ar)  interchange  with  the  unaccented  low  grade  vowels 
i,  u,  r ;  e.  g.  i-yaj-a  I  have  sacrificed :  is-ta  sacrificed ;  vas-ti 
desires  :  us-masi  ive  desire  ;  ja-grah-a  //iave  seised :  ja-grh-iir 
theg  have  seised. 


6  PHONETIC   INTRODUCTION  [5 

a.  Similarly  the  long  syllabhs  5'a,  va,  ra  are  reduced  toi,  u,  ir  ;  e.  g, 
jya  f.  mUjlit :  ji-yd-t8  is  overcoine  ;  bru-ya-t  ivould  say  :  bruv-i-td  id.  ; 
svad-ii  stveei :  sud-aya-ti  sweetens  ;  dragh-lyas  lo)) get- :  dirgh-i,  long. 

c.  The  a  series. 

1.  In  its  low  grade  stage  a  would  noriiially  disappear,  but 
as  a  rule  it  remains  because  its  loss  would  in  most  cases 
lead  to  unpronounceable  or  obscure  forms  ;  e.  g.  as-ti  is : 
s-anti  the>/  are ;  ja-gam-a  I  have  gone :  ja-gm-iir  tlmj  have 
gone  ;  pad-ya-.te  goes :  pi-bd-ana  standing  firm  ;  han-ti  slays : 
ghn-anti  theg  slay. 

2.  The  low  grade  of  the  Vrddhi  vowel  a  is  either  a  or 
total  loss;  e.  g.  pad  m..  foot:  'pad-a,  tvith  the  foot ;  dadha-ti 
puts :  dadh-masi  tve  put ;  pu-na-ti  purifies  :  pu-n-anti  they 
purify ;  da-da-ti  gives :  deva-t-ta  given  hy  the  gods. 

3.  When  a  represents  the  Guna  stage  its  low  grade  is 
normally  i ;  e.  g.  stha-s  thou  hast  stood :  sthi-ta  stood. 

a.  Sometimes  it  is  i  owing  to  analogy ;  e.  g.  pu-na-ti  purifies : 
pu-ni-hi  purify.  Sometimes,  especially  wheia  the  low  grade  syllable 
has  a  secondary  accent,  it  is  a  ;  e.  g.  gah-ate  plunges  :  gdh-ana  n.  depth. 

d.  The  at  and  au  series. 

The  low  grade  of  at  (which  appears  as  ay  before  vowels 
and  a  before  consonants)  is  i  ;  e.  g.  gay-ati  sings,  ga-tha  m. 
song :  gi-ta  sung. 

The  low  grade  of  au  (which  is  parallel  to  va  :  5  ?>  a)  is  u  ; 
e.  g.  dhav-ati  washes :  dhu-ta  tcashed ;  dhau-tari  f.  shalcing : 
dhu-ti  m.  shaJcer,  dhu-ma  m.  smoJce. 

e.  Secondary  shortening  of  i,  u,  r.  The  low  grade 
syllables  i,  u,  ir  and  ur  (=  r)  are  further  reduced  to  1,  u,  r, 
owing  to  shift  of  accent  from  its  normal  position  in  a  word 
to  its  beginning,  in  compounds,  reduplicated  forms,  and 
vocatives;  e.g.a-hutif,  invocation:  -hiiti  call;  didi-vi  shining: 
di-paya  hindle ;  ear-kr-se  tliou  commemoratest :  kir-ti  f. 
praise  (from  root  kr) ;  pi-pr-tam  3.  du,  :  pur-ta  full  (root 
pr) ;  d6vi  voc. :  devi  nom.  goddess  ;  svasru  voc. :  sva-sru-s 
nom.  mother-in-laiv. 


6-7]  THE   CONSONANTS  7 

The  Consonants. 

6.  The  guttural  mutes  represent  the  Inclo-Euvoiiean 
velars  (that  is,  q-sounds).  In  the  combination  k-s  the 
guttural  is  the  regular  phonetic  modification  of  a  palatal 
before  s  ;  e.g.  drs  see :  aor.  adrk-sata ;  vac  speak :  fut. 
vak-syati. 

7.  The  palatals  form  two  series,  the  earlier  and  the  later. 
a.  Original  palatals  are  represented  by  ch  and  s,  and  to 

some  extent  by  j  and  h. 

1.  The  aspirate  ch  is  derived  from  an  IE.  double  sound, 
s+  aspirated  palatal  mute;  e.g.  chid  cut  off=Gk.  cr)(^t§. 
But  in  the  inchoative  suffix  cha  it  seems  to  represent  s  + 
unasj^irated  palatal  mute  ;  e.  g.  gaeha-mi  =  Gk.  (Sda-Koi. 

2.  The  sibilant  s  represents  an  IE.  palatal  (which  seems 
to  have  been  pronounced  dialectically  either  as  a  spirant  or 
a  mute) ;  e.  g.  satam  100  =  Lat.  centum,  Gk.  k-Karov. 

3.  The  old  palatal  j  (originally  the  media  of  s  =  I-Ir.  z, 
French  j)  is  recognizable  by  appearing  as  a  cerebral  when 
final  or  before  mutes ;  e.  g.  yaj-ati  sacrifices  beside  aor. 
a-yat  has  sacrificed,  yas-tr  sacrificer,  is-td  sacrificed. 

4.  The  breathing  h  represents  the  old  palatal  aspirate 
I-Ir.  zh.  It  is  recognizable  as  an  old  palatal  when,  either  as 
final  or  before  t,  it  is  replaced  by  a  cerebral ;  e.  g.  vah-ati 
carries  beside  a-vat  has  carried. 

h.  The  new  palatals  are  e  and  to  some  extent  j  and  h. 
They  are  derived  from  gutturals  (velars),  being  int^n-change- 
able,  in  most  roots  and  formatives,  with  gutturals ;  e.  g. 
s6c-ati  shines  beside  s6k-a  m.  flame,  suk-Yan  flaming,  suk-ra 
hriUiant ;  yuj-e  I^/oJce  beside  yug-a  n.  poJce,  yc3g-a  m.  yoldng, 
yuk-ta  yohed,  -yug-van  yoking ;  du-droh-a  has  injured 
beside  drogh-a  injurious. 

a.  The  original  gutturals  were  changed  to  palatals  by  the  palatal 
sounds  i,  i,  y  immediately  following;  e.  g.  eit-t^  noticed  beside  k6t-a 
m.  will  from  cit  perceive  ;  6j-iyas  stronger  beside  ug-rd,  strong  ;  druh-yu,  a 
proper  name,  beside  drdgh-a  injurious. 


8  PHONETIC   INTKODUCTION  [s-io 

8.  The  cerebrals  are  entirely  secondary,  being  a  specifically 
Indian  product  and  unknown  in  the  Indo-Iranian  period. 
They  are  prohaljly  due  to  aboriginal,  especially  Dravidian, 
influence.  They  are  still  rare  in  the  EV.,  where  they  never 
occur  initially,  but  only  medially  and  finally.  They  have 
as  a  rule  arisen  from  dentals  immediately  following  the 
cerebral  s  (=  original  s,  s,  j,  h)  or  r-sounds  (r,  r,  r) ;  e.g. 
dtis-tara  (=  dus-tara)  mvincihle;  vas-ti  (=  vas-ti)  ivishcs; 
mrs-ta  (=  mrj-ta)  deansecl ;  nida  (=  nizda)^  tiest;  dii-dhi 
(=  duz-dhi)  ill- disposed  ]  drdha  -  (=  drh-ta) /nji ;  nr-nam 
(=  nr-nam)  of  men. 

Final  cerebral  mutes  represent  the  old  palatals  j,  s,  h  ; 
e.  g.  rat  (=  raj)  m.  rider  nom.  s. ;  vipat  (=  vi-pas)  f.  a  river  ; 
sat  (=  sah)  overcoming ;  a-vat  (=  a-vah-t)  has  conveyed 
(3.  s.  aor.  of  vah). 

9.  a.  The  dentals  are  original  sounds,  representing  the 
corresponding  IE.  dentals.  The  mutes  t  and  d,  however, 
sometimes  take  the  place  of  original  s  before  s  and  bh 
respectively ;  e.  g.  a- vat-sis  (AV.)  aor.  of  vas  dwell ; 
mad-bhis  inst.  pi.  of  mas  month. 

h.  The  labials  as  a  rule  represent  the  corresponding  IE. 
sounds.  But  b  is  very  rarely  inherited  ;  the  numljer  of 
words  containing  this  sound  has,  however,  been  greatly 
increased  in  various  Avays.  Thus  it  often  replaces  p  or  bh 
in  Sandhi  and  bh  in  reduplication  ;  e.  g.  pi-bd-ana  firm 
beside  pad-a  n.  place ;  rab-dha  taken  beside  rabhante  they 
take  ;  ba-bhiiva  has  heen  from  bhu  he.  There  are  also  many 
words  containing  b  which  seem  to  have  a  foreign  origin. 

10.  The  nasals.  Of  the  five  nasals  belonging  to  the 
corresponding  five  classes  of  mutes,  only  the  dental  n  and 
the  labial  m  appear  independently  and  in  any  part  of  a  word, 

'  z  (  =  s  or  old  palatal  zh),  the  soft  form  of  s,  lias  always  disa2:)peai'ed 
after  cerebraliziiig  d  or  dh  and  lengthening  the  preceding  vowel. 
^  Though  written  as  a  short  vowel  the  r  is  j^rosodically  long. 


10]  NASALS  9 

initiallj',  medially,  and  finally  ;  e.  g.  matr  f.  mother,  naman 
n.  name.  The  remaining  three  are  always  dependent  on 
a  contiguous  sound.  The  guttural  n,  the  palatal  ft,  and  the 
cerebral  n  are  never  initial,  and  the  last  two  are  never  final. 
The  guttural  n  appears  finally  only  when  a  following  k  or  g 
has  been  dropped,  as  in  stems  ending  in  fie  or  nj  and  in 
those  compounded  with  drs ;  e.  g.  pratyan  nom.  s.  of 
pratyanc /(<cm^  ;  ki-drn  nom.  s.  of  ki-drs  ofivhat  hind? 

a.  Medially  n  appears  regularly  only  before  gutturals  ; 

e.  g.  anka  m.  Iioolc ;  ankhaya  embrace  ;  anga  n.  limh  ;  jangha 

f.  leg.  Before  other  consonants  it  appears  only  when  k  or  g 
has  been  dropped  ;  e.g.  yun-dhi  for  yung-dhi  (=yufij-dhi) 

2.  s.  impv.  of  yuj  join. 

b.  The  palatal  nasal  occurs  only  before  or  after  c  or  j,  and 
before  eh  ;  e.  g.  panea  five  ;  yaj-na  m.  sacrifice  ;  vafichantu 
let  them  desire. 

c.  The  cerebral  n  appears  within  a  word  only,  either 
before  cerebral  mutes  or  replacing  dental  n  after  r,  r,  or  s 
(either  immediately  preceding  or  separated  from  it  by  certain 
intervening  letters);  e.g.  danda  m.  staff;  nr-nam  of  men; 
varna  m.  colour ;  usna  hot ;  kramana  n.  step. 

d.  The  dental  n  is  the  commonest  of  the  nasals  ;  it  is 
more  frequent  than  m,  and  about  three  times  as  frequent  as 
the  other  three  taken  together.  As  a  rule  it  represents 
IE.  n  ;  but  it  also  appears  in  place  of  the  dental  d  or  t,  and 
of  labial  m  before  certain  suffixes.  It  is  substituted  for  d 
before  the  suffix  -na ;  and  for  d  or  t  before  the  m  of 
secondary  suffixes ;  e.  g.  an-na  n.  food  (from  ad  eat) ; 
vidyiin-mant  gleaming  (vidyiit  f.  lightning) ;  mrn-maya 
earthen  (mrd  f.  earth).  It  is  substituted  for  m  before  t ; 
before  suffixal  m  or  v ;  and  before  suffixal  s  or  t  that  have 
been  dropped  as  final  ;  e.  g.  yan-tra  n.  rein  (yam  restrain) ; 
a-gan-ma,  gan-vahi  (aor.  of  gam  go) ;  a-gan  (—  a-gam-s, 
a-gana-t)    2.  3.  s.  aor.    of  gam   go  ;    a-yan  (—  a-yam-s-t) 

3.  s.  aor.  of  yam  restrain  ;  dan  gen.  of  dam  house  (=dani-s). 


10  PHONETIC  INTRODUCTION  [lo-ll 

e.  The  labial  m  as  a  rule  represents  IE.  m  ;  e.  g.  naman, 
Lat.  nomen.  It  is  by  far  the  commonest  labial  sound,  being 
more  frequent  than  the  four  labial  mutes  taken  together. 

/  The  pure  nasal.  Distinct  from  the  five  class  nasals  is 
the  pure  nasal,  variously  called  Anusvara  and  Anunasika, 
which  always  follows  a  vowel  and  is  formed  by  the  breath 
passing  through  the  nose  unmodilied  by  the  influence  of  any 
consonant.  The  former  is  usually  written  with  a  dot  before 
consonants,  the  latter  as  «*  before  vowels.  The  proper  use 
of  Anusvara  is  not  before  mutes,  but  before  sibilants  and  h 
(which  have  no  class  nasal).  When  final,  Anusvara  usually 
represents  m,  sometimes  n  (66  A  2).  Medially  Anusvara 
regularly  appears  before  sibilants  and  h ;  e.  g.  vamsa  m. 
reed ;  havimsi  ojfer'mgs ;  mainsa  n.  flesh ;  simha  m.  lion. 
It  usually  appears  before  s,  where  it  always  represents 
m  or  n ;  e.  g.  mamsate  3.  s.  subj.  aor.  of  man  tlmik ; 
pimsanti  beside  pinasti  from  pis  crush ;  kramsyate  fut.  of 
kram  stride.  When  Anusvara  appears  before  s  or  h  (=  IE. 
guttural  or  palatal)  it  represents  the  corresponding  class 
nasal. 

H.  The  semivowels.  The  semivowels  y,  r,  1,  v  are 
peculiar  in  having  each  a  vowel  corresponding  to  it,  viz. 
i,  r,  1,  u  respectively.  They  are  called  anta(h.)stha  in  the 
Pratisakhyas,  or  '  intermediate ',  as  standing  midway  between 
vowels  and  consonants. 

a.  The  semivowel  y  is  constantly  written  for  i  before 
other  voAvels  within  the  Veda  itself.  It  also  sometimes 
appears  without  etymological  justification,  especially  after 
roots  in  -a,  before  vowel  suffixes  ;  e.  g.  da-y-i  3.  s.  aor.  pass, 
of  da  give.  Otherwise  it  is  based  either  on  IE.  i  (=  Gk. 
spiritus  asper)  or  voiced  palatal  spirant  y  {=  Gk.  () ;  e.g. 
ya-s  iclio  (Gk.  o-y),  yaj  sacrifice  (Gk.  dy-Lo^) ;  but  yas  loil 
(Gk.  (eco),  yuj  yoke  (Gk.  ^vy-).  It  is  probably  due  to  this 
difiference  of  origin  that  yas  hoil  and  yam  restrain  reduplicate 
Avith  ya  in  the  perfect,  but  yaj  sacrifice  with  i. 


11]  SEMIVOWELS  11 

b.  The  semivowel  v  is  constantly  written  for  u  before 
other  vowels  within  the  Veda  itself.  Otherwise  it  seems 
always  to  be  based  on  IE.  u,  that  is,  on  a  v  interchangeable 
with  u,  but  never  on  an  IE.  spirant  v  not  interchangeable 
with  u. 

c.  The  semivowel  r  generally  corresponds  to  IE.  r,  but 
also  often  to  IE.  1.  As  Old  Iranian  invariably  has  r  for 
both,  it  seems  as  if  there  had  been  a  tendency  to  rhotacism 
in  the  Indo-Iranian  period.  In  order  to  account  for  the 
Vedic  relation  of  r  to  1,  it  appears  necessary  to  assume 
a  mixture  of  three  dialects :  one  in  which  the  IE.  r  and  1 
were  kept  apart ;  another  in  which  IE.  1  became  r  (the 
Vedic  dialect) ;  and  a  third  in  which  IE.  r  became  1 
throughout  (the  later  Magadhi). 

r  is  secondary  when  it  takes  the  place  of  phonetic  d  (=  z) 
as  the  final  of  stems  in  is  and  us  before  endings  beginning 
with  bh ;  e.  g.  havir-bhis  and  vapur-bhis.  This  substitution 
is  due  to  the  influence  of  external  Sandhi,  where  is  and  us 
would  become  ir  and  ur. 

a.  Metathesis  of  r  takes  place  when  ar  would  be  followed  by  s  or  h 
+  consonant.  It  appears  in  forms  of  drs  see  and  srj  send  forth;  e.g. 
drfctum  to  see,  sdmsrastr  one  2vho  engages  in  battle  ;  also  in  brahmdn  m. 
priest,  brdhman  n.  devotion  beside  barhfs  n.  sacrificial  Utter  (from  brh  or 
barh  make  big)  ;  and  in  a  few  other  words. 

d.  The  semivowel  1  represents  IE.  1  and  in  a  few  instances 
IE.  r.  It  is  rarer  than  in  any  cognate  language  except  Old 
Iranian,  in  which  it  does  not  occur  at  all.  It  is  much  rarer 
than  r,  which  is  seven  times  as  frequent.  A  gradual  increase 
of  1  is  apparent  in  the  KV.  ;  thus  in  the  tenth  book  are 
found  the  verbs  mluc  and  labh,  and  the  nouns  16man, 
lohita,  which  in  the  earlier  books  appear  as  mruc  sink, 
rabh  seize,  rdman  n.  hair,  rohita  ixd.  This  letter  occurs 
eight  times  as  often  in  the  latest  parts  of  the  EV.  as  in  the 
oldest ;  and  it  is  seven  times  as  common  in  the  AV.  as  in 
the  RV.     It  seems  likely  tliat  the  recorded  Vedic  dialect 


12_  PHONETIC   INTRODUCTION  [11-12 

was  descended  from  an  Indo-Iranian  one  in  which  rhotacism 
had  removed  every  1 ;  but  that  there  must  have  been  another 
Vedic  dialect  in  which  IE.  r  and  1  were  kept  distinct,  and 
a  third  in  which  IE.  r  became  1  throughout ;  from  the 
latter  two  1  must  have  found  its  way  into  the  literary 
language  to  an  increasing  extent.  In  the  oldest  parts  of  the 
RV.  there  are  no  verbal  forms  preserving  IE.  1,  and  only  a  few 
nouns :  (u)loka  m.  free  space,  sloka  m.  call,  and  -misla  mixed. 

a.  In  the  later  Samhitas  1  occasionally  occurs  both  medially  and 
finally  for  d  ;  e.  g.  ile  (VS.  Kanva)  =  ide  (RV,  ile) ;  bal  iti  (AV.),  of. 
RV.  bal  ittha.  In  a  good  many  words  1  is  probably  of  foreign  origin. 

12.  The  sibilants  are  all  voiceless,  but  there  are  various 
traces  of  the  earlier  existence  of  voiced  sibilants  (cp.  7  a  3  ; 
8  ;  15,  2  A:).  There  is  a  considerable  interchange  between 
the  sibilants,  chiefly  as  a  result  of  assimilation. 

a.  The  palatal  sibilant  s  represents  an  IE.  palatal  (mute 
or  spirant).  Besides  being  the  regular  substitute  for  dental  s 
in  external  Sand  hi  before  voiceless  palatals  (e.  g.  indras  ca), 
it  occasionally  rej^resents  that  sibilant  within  words  by 
assimilation  ;  e.  g.  svasura  (Lat.  socer)  father- in-Um ;  sasa 
(IE.  Tiaso)  m.  hare.  Sometimes  this  substitution  takes  place, 
without  assimilation,  under  the  influence  of  allied  words,  as 
in  k6sa  m.  hair  beside  k^sara  (Lat.  caesarks).  It  is  also  to 
some  extent  confused  with  the  other  two  sibilants  in  the 
Samhitas,  but  here  it  interchanges  much  oftener  with  s 
than  with  s.  Before  s  the  palatal  s  becomes  k,  regularly 
when  medial,  sometimes  when  final ;  e.  g.  drk-s-a-se  2.  s.  aor. 
subj.  mid.,  and  -drk[sj  nom.  s.  from  drs  see. 

h.  The  cerebral  s  is,  like  the  cerebral  mutes,  altogether 
secondary,  always  representing  either  an  original  palatal  or 
an  original  dental  sibilant.  Medially  it  represents  the 
palatals  s  {=  I-Ir.  s)  and  j  (=:  I-Ir.  z)  and  the  combination  ks 
before  the  cerebral  tenues  t  th  (themselves  produced  from 
dental  tonnes  by  this  s) ;  e.  g.  nas-ta  from  nas  he  lost ; 
mrs-ta  3.  s.  impf.,  from  mrj  ioi])e ;  tas-ta  from  taks  liew. 


12-14]  BREATHING  H— SPIRANTS  13 

Medially  it  is  regularly,  and  initially  very  frequently, 
substituted  for  dental  s  after  vowels  other  than  a  and  after 
the  consonants  k,  r,  s ;  e.  g.  tisthati  from  stha  stand ; 
su-sup-ur  3.  pi.  pf.  from  svap  sleep]  rsabha  m.  hull) 
uksan  m.  ox ;  varsa  n.  rain  ;  havis-su  in  oblations ;  anu 
spxva,nt\  tliey  praise  ;  go-sa.ni  tvinning  cattle  ;  divi  san  being 
-in  heaven. 

Occasionally  s  represents  dental  s  as  a  i-esult  of  assimila- 
tion ;  e.  g.  sas  six  (Lat.  sex) ;  sat  victorious  nom.  s.  from 
sah  overcoming. 

c.  The  dental  s  as  a  rule  represents  IE.  s  ;  e.  g.  asva-s 
horse,  Lat.  equo-s ;  as-ti,  Gk.  ea-ri.  In  Sandhi  it  is  often 
replaced  by  the  palatal  s  and  still  oftener  by  the  cere- 
bral s. 

13.  The  breathing  h  is  a  secondaiy  sound  repi'esenting 
as  a  rule  the  second  half  of  an  original  guttural  or  palatal 
aspirate,  but  occasionally  of  the  dental  dh  and  the  labial  bh. 
It  usually  stands  for  palatalized  gh,  this  origin  being 
recognizable  by  the  appearance  of  the  guttural  in  cognate 
forms ;  e.  g.  hdn-ti  strihes  beside  ghn-anti,  jaghana ;  dudroha 
has  injured  beside  drogha  injurious.  It  sometimes  represents 
an  old  palatal  aspirate  (=  I-Ir.  zh),  as  is  recognizable  by  its 
being  replaced  as  final  or  before  t  by  a  cerebral ;  e.  g.  vah-ati 
carries  beside  a-vat  has  carried,  udha  (=  uz-dha)  for  vah-ta. 
It  stands  for  dh  e.  g.  in  gah-ate  plunges  beside  gadha  n. 
ford ;  hi-ta  placed  beside  dhi-ta  from  dha  put.  It  represents 
bh  in  the  verb  grah  seise  beside  grabh.  The  various  origins 
of  h  led  to  a  certain  amount  of  confusion  in  the  groups  of 
forms  from  roots  containing  that  sound.  Thus  beside 
mugdha,  the  phonetic  past  participle  of  muh  be  confused, 
appears  mudha  (AV.)  bewildered. 

14.  Voiceless  spirants.  There  are  three  such  represent- 
ing original  final  s  or  r.  Visarjanlya  has  its  proper  place  in 
pausa.  Jihvamuliya  [formed  at  the  root  of  the  tongue)  is  the 
guttural  spirant  and  is  appropriate  before  initial  voiceless 


14  PHONETIC   INTRODUCTION  [14-15 

gutturals  (k,  kh).  UpadhmFintya  {on-hrcathing)  is  the  bi-labial 
spirant  f  and  appears  before  voiceless  labials  (p,  ph). 
Visarjanlya  may  take  the  place  of  the  latter  two,  and  always 
does  so  in  the  printed  texts  of  the  Samhitas. 

15.  Ancient  pronunciation.  As  regards  the  pronuncia- 
tion prevailing  about  500  b.  c.  we  have  a  sufficiently  exact 
knowledge  derived  from  the  transcription  of  Sanskrit  words 
in  foreign  languages,  especially  Greek  ;  from  the  information 
contained  in  the  old  grammarians,  Panini  and  his  school ;  and 
especially  from  the  detailed  statements  of  the  Pratisakhyas, 
the  ancient  phonetic  works  dealing  with  the  Samhitas. 
The  internal  evidence  supplied  by  the  phonetic  changes 
occurring  in  the  language  of  the  texts  themselves  and  the 
external  evidence  of  comparative  philology  justify  us  in 
concluding  that  the  pronunciation  in  the  period  of  the 
Samhitas  was  practically  the  same  as  in  Panini's  time. 
The  only  possible  exceptions  are  a  very  few  doubtful  points. 
The  following  few  remarks  will  therefore  suffice  on  the 
subject  of  pronunciation : 

1.  a.  The  vowels.  The  simple  vowels  i,  u  and  a  were 
pronounced  as  in  Italian.  But  a  in  the  time  of  the 
Pratisakhyas  was  already  sounded  as  a  very  short  close 
neutral  vowel  like  the  u  in  English  liut.  It  is,  however, 
probable  from  the  fact  that  the  metre  hardly  ever  admits 
of  S,  being  elided  after  e  and  o  in  the  RV.,  though  the 
written  text  drojjs  it  in  about  75  percent,  of  the  occurrences, 
that  at  the  time  when  the  hymns  were  composed  the 
pronunciation  of  a  was  still  open,  but  that,  at  the  time 
when  the  Samhita  text  was  constituted,  the  close  pronun- 
ciation was  already  becoming  general. 

The  vowel  r,  now  usually  sounded  as  ri  (an  early  pro- 
nunciation as  shown  by  the  confusion  of  r  and  ri  in  ancient 
inscriptions  and  MSS.),  was  in  the  Samhitas  pronounced  as 
a  vocalic  r,  somewhat  like  the  sound  in  the  final  syllable  of 
the  French  chumhre.    It  is  described  in  the  RV.  Pratisakhya 


J 


15]  PKONUNCIATION  16 

as  containing  an  r  in  the  middle.  This  agrees  with  ere, 
the  equivalent  of  r  in  Old  Iranian. 

The  very  rare  vowel  1,  now  usually  pronounced  as  Iri,  was 
in  the  Samhitas  a  vocalic  1,  descril^ed  in  the  RV.  Pratisakhya 
as  corresponding  to  1  representing  an  original  r. 

h.  The  diphthongs  e  and  o  were  already  pronounced  as 
the  simple  long  vowels  e  and  6  in  the  time  of  the  Pratisakhyas ; 
and  that  this  was  even  the  case  in  the  Samhitas  is  shown  bj' 
the  fact  that  their  Sandhi  before  a  was  no  longer  ay  and  av, 
and  that  the  a  was  beginning  to  be  elided  after  e  and  o. 
But  that  they  represent  the  original  genuine  diphthongs  ai 
and  au  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  they  are  produced  in 
Sandhi  by  the  coalescence  of  a  with  i  and  u. 

The  diphthongs  ai  and  au  are  at  the  present  day  pro- 
nounced as  ai  and  au,  and  were  so  pronounced  even  at  the 
time  of  the  Pratisakhyas.  But  that  they  etymologically 
represent  ai  and  au  is  shown  by  their  Sandhi. 

c.  Lengthened  vowels.  The  vowels  i  and  u  were  often 
pronounced  long  before  suffixal  y  ;  e.  g.  su-ya-te  is  pressed 
(\/su) ;  jani-yant  desiring  a  tvifc  (jani) ;  also  before  r  when 
a  consonant  follows;  e.g.  gir-bhis  (but  gir-as) ;  a,  i,  u 
often  become  long  before  v  ;  e.  g.  a-vidh-yat  he  ivounded 
(a  is  augment) ;  ji-gi-vams  having  conquered  {Vji) ;  rta-van 
observing  order  (rta) ;  ya-vant  how  great ;  as  compensation 
for  the  loss  of  a  following  consonant ;  e.  g.  gu-dha  for  guh-ta 
(15,  2  h) ;  they  are  also  often  pronounced  long  for  metrical 
reasons  ;  e.  g.  srudhi  havam  hear  our  prayer. 

d.  Svarabhakti.'  When  a  consonant  is  in  conjunction 
with  r  or  a  nasal,  the  metre  shows  that  a  very  short  vowel  ^ 
must  often  be  pronounced  between  them  ;  e.  g.  indra  = 
ind^ra ;  yajna  =  yaj'^na  sacrifice  ;  gna  =  g"na  tvoman. 


^  A  term  used  in  the  Pratisakhyas  and  meaning  '  vowel-part '. 
^  Described  by  the  PriitiSakliyas  as  equ 
and  generally  as  equivalent  to  a  in  sound 


"^  Described  by  the  PriitiSakliyas  as  equal  to  g-,  ^,  or  |  mora  in  length 


16  PHONETIC   INTRODUCTION  [15 

c.  Loss  of  vowels.  With  very  few  exceptions  the  only 
vowel  lost  is  initial  a  which,  in  one  per  cent,  of  its  occurrences 
in  the  RV.  and  about  20  per  cent,  in  the  AV.  and  the  metrical 
portions  of  the  YV.,  is  dropped  in  Sandhi  after  e  and  o. 
In  a  few  words  the  disaj^pearance  of  initial  a  is  prehistoric  ; 
e.  g.  vi  bird  (Lat.  avis) ;  santi  the>/  are  (Lat.  sunt). 

f.  Hiatus.  In  the  written  text  of  the  Samhitas  hiatus, 
though  as  a  rule  tolerated  in  dij^hthongs  only,  appears  in 
Sandhi  when  a  final  s,  y,  v  has  been  dropped  before 
a  following  vowel ;  when  final  i,  u,  e  of  dual  endings  are 
followed  by  vowels ;  and  when  a  remains  after  final  e 
and  o. 

Though  not  written,  hiatus  is  common  elsewhere  also  in 
the  Samhitas  :  y  and  v  must  often  be  pronounced  as  i  and  u, 
and  a  long  vowel  or  diphthong  as  two  vowels,  the  original 
vowels  of  contractions  having  often  to  be  restored  both 
within  a  word  and  in  Sandhi ;  e.  g.  jy^stha  mightiest  as 
jya-istha  (=  jya-istha  from  jya  he  miglity). 

2.  Consonants,  a.  The  aspirates  were  double  sounds, 
consisting  of  mutes  followed  by  a  breathing ;  thus  k-h  is 
pronounced  as  in  '  ink-horn ' ;  t-h  as  in  '  pot-house  ' ;  p-h  as 
in  '  top-heavy  ' ;  g-h  as  in  '  log-house " ;  d-h  as  in  '  mad-house  '; 
b-h  as  in  '  Hob-house '. 

h.  The  gutturals  were  no  doubt  velars  or  sounds  pro- 
duced by  the  back  of  the  tongue  against  the  soft  palate. 
They  are  described  by  the  Pratisakhyas  as  formed  at  the 
'  root  of  the  tongue '  and  at  the  '  root  of  the  jaw '. 

c.  The  palatals  c,  j,  ch  are  pronounced  like  ch  in  '  church  ', 
j  in  'join',  and  ch  in  the  second  part  of .' Churchill'. 

d.  The  cerebrals  were  pronounced  somewhat  like  the 
so-called  dentals  t,  d,  n  in  English,  but  with  the  tip  of 
the  tongue  turned  farther  back  against  the  roof  of  the 
mouth.  They  include  the  cerebral  1  and  Ih  which  in 
Rigvedic  texts  take  the  place  of  d  and  dh  between  vowels. 
The  latter  occurs  medially  only  ;   the  former  finally  also. 


15]  PKONUNCIATION  17 

Examples  are:   ila  refreshment;  tura-sal  abhi-bhuty6jah  ; 
a-salha  invincible. 

e.  The  dentals  in  the  time  of  the  PiTitisakhyas  were 
post-dentals,  being  produced  by  the  tongue,  according  to 
their  description,  at  the  '  root  of  the  teeth  '  (danta-mula), 

/.  The  class  nasals  are  produced  with  organs  of  speech 
in  the  same  position  as  for  the  formation  of  the  correspond 
ing    mutes   while    the    breath    passes    through    the    nose 
The  pure  nasal,  when  called  Anunasika,  combines  with  the 
preceding  vowel  to  form  a  single  sound,  a  nasalized  vowel 
as   in   the   French   'bon';   when   called    Anusvara    {after 
sound),  it  forms  in  combination  with  the  preceding  vowel 
two  successive  sounds,  a  pure  vowel  immediately  followed 
by  the  pure  nasal,  though  seeming  to  form  a  single  sound, 
as  in   the  English   'bang'  (where,   however,  the  nasal  is 
guttural,  not  pure). 

g.  The  semivowel  y  is  the  voiced  palatal  spirant  produced 
in  the  same  place  as  the  palatal  vowel  i.  The  semivowel  v 
is  described  by  the  Pratisakhyas  as  a  voiced  labio -dental 
spirant.  It  is  like  the  English  v  or  the  German  w.  The 
semivowel  r  must  originally  have  been  a  cerebral,  as  is 
shown  by  its  phonetic  effect  on  a  following  dental  n.  By 
the  time  of  the  Pratisakhj^as  it  was  pronounced  in  other 
positions  also.  Thus  the  RV.  Pratisalihya  speaks  of  it  as 
either  post-dental  or  produced  farther  back  (but  not  as 
cerebral). 

The  semivowel  1  is  described  in  the  Pratisakhyas  as 
pronounced  in  the  same  position  as  the  dentals,  which 
means  that  it  was  a  post-dental. 

h.  The  sibilants  are  all  voiceless.  The  dental  s  sounds 
like  s  in  '  sin ' ;  the  cerebral  s  like  sh  in  '  shun '  (but  with 
the  tip  of  the  tongue  farther  back) ;  while  the  palatal  is 
produced  midway  between  the  two,  being  the  sibilant  pro- 
nounced in  the  same  place  as  the  spirant  in  the  Grerman 
ich.    Though  the  voiced  sibilants  z,  z  (palatal  =  French  j), 

1819  C 


18  PHONETIC   INTRODUCTION  [16 

7.,  zh  (cerebral)  have  entirely  disappeared,  they  have  generally 
left  traces  of  their  foi'mer  existence  in  the  phonetic  changes 
they  have  produced. 

i.  The  sound  h  was  undoubtedly  pronounced  as  a  voiced 
breathing  in  the  Samhitas.  The  Pratisakhyas  describe  it  as 
voiced  and  as  identical  with  the  second  element  of  voiced 
aspirates  (g-h,  d-h,  b-h).  This  is  corroborated  by  the 
spelling  ^  1-h  (=  dh)  beside  36  1  (=  d). 

j.  There  are  three  voiceless  spirants  appearing  only  as 
finals.  The  usual  one,  called  Visarjanlya  in  the  Pratisakhyas, 
is  according  to  the  Taittirlya  Pratisakhya  articulated  in  the 
same  place  as  the  end  of  the  preceding  vowels.  Its  place 
may  be  taken  by  Jihvamullya  before  the  voiceless  initial 
gutturals  k,  kh ;  and  by  Upadhmanlya  before  the  voiceless 
initial  labials  p,  ph.  These  two  are  regarded  by  the  EV. 
Pratisakhya  as  forming  the  second  half  of  the  voiceless 
aspirates  kh  and  ph  respectively  (just  as  h  forms  the  second 
half  of  gli,  bh,  &c.).  They  are  therefore  the  guttural  spirant 
(Greek)  x  ^^^^  ^^^  bilabial  spirant  f  respectively. 

7c.  Loss  of  consonants.  This  is  almost  entirely  confined 
to  groups  of  consonants.  When  the  group  is  final,  all  but 
the  first  element,  as  a  rule,  is  dropped  in  pausa  and  in 
Sandhi  (28).  In  initial  consonant  groups  a  sibilant  is  often 
lost  before  a  mute ;  e.  g.  candra  shining  beside  scandra ; 
stanayitnu  m.  beside  tanayitnii  thunder;  tayii  m.  beside 
stayii  thief;  tr  beside  str  m.  star ;  pasyati  sees  beside  spas 
m.  S2)y,  -spas-ta  seen.  In  a  medial  group  the  sibilants  s 
and  s  regularly  disappear  between  mutes  ;  e.  g.  a-bhak-ta, 
3.  s.  aor.  for  a-bhak-s-ta  beside  a-bhak-s-i.  A  mute  may 
disappear  between  a  nasal  and  a  mute  ;  e.  g.  yun-dhi  for 
yung-dhi. 

tt.  Medially,  voiced  sibilants,  the  dental  z,  the  cerebral  z, 
and  the  palatal  z,  have  disappeared  before  the  voiced  dentals 
d,  dh,  and  h,  but  nearly  always  leaving  a  trace  of  their 
former   existence.     Only   in    the   two    roots   containing   a, 


i 


15]  PEONUNCIATION  19 

as  sit,  sas  oidcr,  the  sibihmt  has  disappeared  without  a  trace : 
a-dhvam,  sa-sa-dhi.  But  when  a  preceded  the  z  the  loss 
of  the  sibilant  is  indicated  by  e  taking  the  place  of  az  ; 
e.  g.  e-dhi  (for  az-dhi)  from  as  he ;  sed,  perfect  stem  of  sad 
sit  for  sazd ;  similarly  in  de-hi  give  (for  daz-dhi)  beside 
dad-dhi.  When  other  vowels  than  a  preceded,  the  z  was 
cerebralized  and  disappeared  after  cerebralizing  the  follow- 
ing dental  and  lengthening  the  preceding  vowel ;  thus 
a-sto-dhvam  (=  a-stoz-dhvam  for  a-sto-s-dhvam)  2.  pi. 
aor.  beside  a-sto-s-ta ;  similarly  midha  n.  retvanl  (Gk. 
/xto-^o-s).  Similarly  the  old  voiced  palatal  z  disappeared  after 
cerebralizing  a  following  d  or  dh  and  lengthening  the 
preceding  vowel ;  e.  g.  ta-dhi  for  taz-dhi  (=  tak-s-dhi)  from 
taks  fashion]  so-dha  for  sas-dha  (=  sak-s-dha)  beside 
sas-tha  sixtlt.  Still  commoner  is  the  loss  of  the  old  aspirated 
palatal  zh  represented  by  h,  which  was  dropped  after 
cerebralizing  and  aspirating  a  following  t  and  lengthening 
the  preceding  vowel ;  e.  g.  sa-dhr  for  sah-tr  conqueror  from 
sah  ;  giidha  concealed  for  guh-ta  (from  guzh-ta). 

I.  Haplology.  When  two  identical  or  similar  syllables 
are  in  juxtaposition,  one  of  them  is  sometimes  dropped  ; 
e.  g.  tuvi-ra[va]-van  roaring  miglitily  beside  tuvi-rava ; 
ir[adh]adhyai  inf.  of  iradh  sceTi  to  win ;  ma-dugha  m. 
a  plant  yielding  honey,  beside  madhu-dilgha  shedding  sweet- 
ness;  sirsa-[sajkti  f.  headache. 


0-2 


20 


CHAPTER   II 

RULES  OF  SANDHI  OR  EUPHONIC  COMBINATION 

OF  SOUNDS 

16.  Though  the  sentence  is  naturally  the  nnit  of  speech, 
which  forms  an  unbroken  chain  of  syllables  euphonically 
combined,  it  is  strictly  so  only  in  the  prose  portions  of  the 
AV.  and  the  YV.  But  as  the  great  bulk  of  the  Vedas  is 
metrical,  the  editors  of  the  Samhita  text  treat  the  hemistich 
(generall}'^  consisting  of  two  Padas  or  verses)  as  the  euphonic 
unit,  being  specially  strict  in  applying  the  rules  of  Sandhi 
between  the  verses  forming  the  hemistich.  But  the  evidence 
of  metre  supported  by  that  of  accent  shows  that  the  Pada  is 
the  true  euphonic  unit.  The  form  which  the  final  of  a  word 
shows  varies  according  as  it  appears  in  pausa  at  the  end  of 
a  Pada,  or  in  combination  with  a  following  word  within  the 
Pada.  With  the  former  is  concerned  the  law  of  finals  in 
pausa,  with  the  latter  the  rules  of  Sandhi.  Avoidance 
of  hiatus  and  assimilation  are  the  leading  principles  on 
which  the  rules  of  Sandhi  are  based. 

Though  both  are  in  general  founded  on  the  same  phonetic 
laws,  it  is  necessary,  owing  to  certain  differences,  to  dis- 
tinguish external  Sandhi,  which  determines  the  changes 
of  final  and  initial  letters  of  words,  from  internal  Sandhi, 
which  applies  to  the  final  letters  of  verbal  roots  and 
nominal  stems  when  followed  by  certain  suffixes  and 
terminations. 

a.  The  rules  of  external  Sandhi  apply  with  few  exceptions 
(which  are  survivals  from  an  earlier  stage  of  external  Sandhi) 
to  words  forming  compounds,  and  to  final  letters  of  nominal 
stems  before  the  case-endings  beginning  with  consonants 
{-bhyam  -bhis,  -bhyas,  -su)  or  before  secondary  (182,  2) 
suffixes  beginning  with  any  consonant  except  y. 


i 


17-18]  EXTEENAL  SANDHI  21 

A.    Extei'nal  Sandhi. 
Classification  of  Vowels. 

17.  Vowels  are  divided  into 

A.   1.  Simple  vowels:  aa;ii;uu;rr;    1. 

2.  Guna  vowels :      a  a ;    e         o        ar      al. 

3.  Vrdd hi  vowels:     a    ;    ai  ;     au  ;    ar.^ 

a.  Guna  {secondary  quality)  has  the  appearance  of  Ijeing 
the  simple  vowel  strengthened  by  combination  with  a  pre- 
ceding a  according  to  the  rule  (19 «)  of  external  Sandhi 
(except  that  a  itself  remains  unchanged)  ;  Vrddhi  {increase), 
of  being  the  Guna  vowel  strengthened  by  combination  with 
another  a.^ 

B.-  1.  Vowels  liable  to  be  changed  into  semivowels  :  i,  i ; 
u,  u ;  r^  and  the  diphthongs  e,  ai,  o,  au  (the  latter  half  of 
which  is  i  or  u) :  consonantal  vowels. 

2.  Vowels  not  liable  to  be  changed  into  semivowels  (and 
only  capable  of  coalescence) :  a,  a  :  unconsonantal  vowels. 

Combination  of  Pinal  and  Initial  Vowels. 

18.  If  the  same  simple  vowel  (short  or  long)  occurs  at 
the  end  of  one  word  and  the  beginning  of  the  next, 
contraction  resulting  in  the  long  vowel  ^  is  the  rule  in  the 
written  text  of  the  Samhitas.  Thus  ihasti  =  iha  asti ; 
indra  =  indra  a  ;  tvagne  =  tva  agne  ;  vidam  =  vi  idam  ; 
siiktani  =  su  uktam. 

^  The  Vrddhi  form  of  1  (vvliich  would  be  al)  does  not  occur. 

-  In  this  vowel  gradation,  as  Comparative  Philology  shows,  the 
Guna  vowel  rejjresents  the  normal  stage,  from  which  the  simple 
vowel  was  reduced  by  loss  of  accent,  while  Vrddhi  is  a  lengthened 
variety  of  Guna  (5  a).  The  reduction  of  the  syllables  ya,  va,  ra  (which 
are  parallel  with  the  Guna  stage)  to  the  corresponding  vowels  i,  u,  r 
(5  h)  is  termed  Samprasarana  (distnicUon). 

^  r  never  appears  under  conditions  rendering  it  liable  to  be  changed 
into  r  (cp.  4  a,  p.  4). 

^  r  does  not  occur  because  rr  never  meet  in  the  Samhitas,  and  final 
r  does  not  even  occur  in  the  RV. 


^2  EXTERNAL  VOWEL   SANDHI  [I8-10 

a.  The  contraction  of  a  +  a  and  of  u  +  u  occasionally  does 
not  take  place,  even  in  the  written  text  of  the  RV.,  both 
between  the  Padas  of  a  hemistich  and  within  a  Pada  ;  thus 
manisa  I  agnih. ;  manisa  abhi ;  vilu  uta  ;  su  urdhvah  ; 
and  in  a  compound,  su-utayah. 

h.  On  the  other  hand,  the  metre  requires  the  contracted 
vowels  of  the  written  text  to  be  restored  in  pronunciation. 
In  such  cases  the  restored  initial  is  long  by  nature  or 
position,  while  the  preceding  final,  if  long,  must  be  shortened.^ 
Thus  casat  is  pronounced  as  ca  asat ;  carcata  as  ca  areata  ; 
map^h  as  ma  ap6h  (for  ma  ap61i) ;  mrlatidrse  as  mrlati 
idrse  ;  yantindavah  as  yanti  indavah  ;  bhavantuksanah 
as  bhavantu  uksanah.  When  the  first  word  is  a  mono- 
syllable (especially  vi  or  hi),  the  written  contractions  i  and 
u  are  usually  to  be  pronounced  with  hiatus ;  thus  hindra  as 
hi  indra. 

19.  a  and  a 

a.  coalesce  with  the  simple  vowels  1  '^  and  u  to  the  Guna 
vowels  e  and  o  ^  respectively ;  e.  g.  ihoha  =  iha  iha ; 
pit6va  =  pita  iva  ;  6m  =  a  im  ;  6bha  =  a  ubha.*  They 
are  never  contracted  to  ar  in  the  written  text  of  the  RV.  or 
VS. ;  ^  but  the  metre  shows  that  the  combination  is  sometimes 
to  be  pronounced  as  ar,  for  instance  in  the  compound 
sapta-rsayah  the  seven  seers  =  saptarsayah. 


^  Because  of  tlio  prosodical  rule  that  a  long  vowel  is  always 
shortened  before  another  vowel.     Cf.  note  5. 

2  Occasionally  a  -f  i  remain  uncontracted  in  the  written  text  of 
the  RV.,  as  jya  iyam,  piba  imam,  ranaya  ih^. 

'  This  contraction  is  a  survival  because  e  and  o  arc  simijle  long 
vowels,  but  they  were  originally  =  ai,  au. 

*  But  in  many  instances  where  the  contraction  is  written,  the 
original  simple  vowels  must  be  restored  with  hiatus  ;  thus  subhdgosah 
=  subhaga  usah. 

s  a  is  always  shortened  or  nasalized  before  r  in  the  written  text ; 
e.  g.  td.tha  rtuh  (for  tatha) ;  vipanyam  rtfisya  (for  vipanya). 


19-21]  EXTERNAL  VOWEL   SANDIII  23 

h.  coalesce  with  Guna  vowels  to  Vrcldhi ;  e.  g.  aibhih 
=  a  ebhih.^ 

c.  are  absorbed  by  Vrddhi  vowels ;  e.  g.  somasyaii^ijah 
=  sdmasya  ausijah. 

20.  The  simple  consonantal  vowels  i  and  u  before  dis- 
similar vowels  or  before  diphthongs  are  regularly  changed 
to  the  semivowels  y  and  v  respectively  in  the  written  text 
of  the  Samhitas  ;  e.  g.  praty  ayam  =  prati  ayam  ;  jdnitry 
ajijanat  =  janitri  ajijanat ;  a  tv  6ta,  =  a  tii  6ta.  But  the 
evidence  of  the  metre  shows  that  this  y  or  v  nearly  always 
has  the  syllabic  value  of  i  or  u.^  Thus  vy  usah  must  be 
read  as  vi  usah ;  vidathesv  anjan  as  vidathesu  anjan. 

a.  Final  r  (which  does  not  occur  in  the  RV.)  becomes  r 
before  a  dissimilar  vowel ;  an  example  is  vijnatr  etat  = 
vijnatr  etat  (SB.). 

21.  The  Guna  vowels  e  and  o 

a.  remain  unchanged  before  a,^  which  is  generally  ^  elided 
in  the  written  text  of  the  Samhitas,  biit  according  to  the 
evidence  of  the  metre,  must  almost  invariably  in  the  RV., 
and  generally  in  the  AV.  and  YV.,  be  pronounced,^  whether 
written  or  not."     In  devaso  apturah  (i.  3^)  the  a  is  both 

^  a  instead  of  contracting  with  e  is  sometimes  nasalized  befoi-e  it  : 
aminantam  6vaih.  (for  a  e)  ;  updstham  eka  (for  a  e).  Again  a  is 
sometimes  elided  before  e  and  o  ;  as  up'esatu  (for  a  e),  yath'ohise 
(for  a  o). 

2  Because  i  and  u  are  prosodically  shortened  before  a  following 
vowel  (p.  22,  note  1). 

^  The  exceptional  treatment  of  e  in  stdtava  ambyam  for  stotavs 
ambyam  is  a  survival  showing  that  the  Sandhi  of  e  and  o  before  a 
was  originally  the  same  as  before  other  vowels. 

*  In  the  RV.  it  is  elided  in  about  75  per  cent.,  in  the  AV.  in  about 
66  per  cent,  of  its  occurrences. 

^  In  the  RV.  it  must  be  pronounced  in  99  per  cent.,  in  the  AV.  and 
the  metrical  parts  of  the  YV.  in  about  80  per  cent,  of  its  occurrences. 

^  The  frequent  elision  of  the  a  in  the  written  text  compared  with 
its  almost  invariable  retention  in  the  original  text  of  the  RV.,  indicates 
a  period  of  transition  between  the  latter  and  the  total  elision  of  the 
post-Vedic  period. 


24  EXTERNAL   VOWEL  SANDHI  [21-23 

written  and  pronounced  ;  in  sunav6  'gne  (i.  1")  it  must  be 
restored  as  sunave  I  agne. 

h.  before  every  other  vowel  (or  diphthong)  would  naturally' 
become  ay  and  av  (the  form  they  assume  within  a  word), 
but  the  former  drops  the  semivowel  throughout,  while  the 
latter  does  so  only  before  a  ;  e.  g.  agna  iha  (for  agnay) ; 
vaya  ukth^bhih  (for  vayav) ;  but  vayav  a  yahi. 

22.  The  Vrddlii  vowels  at  and  au  are  treated  before 
every  vowel  (including  a)  or  diphthong  exactly  in  the  same 
way  as  e  and  o  before  vowels  other  than  a.  Thus  ai 
becomes  a  (through  ay)  throughout,  but  au  only  before  u  ^ 
(through  av) ;  e.  g.  tasma  aksi  (for  tasmay),  tasma  indraya  ; 
sujihva  lipa  (for  sujihvav),  but  tav  a,  tav  indragni. 

a.  The  (secondary)  hiatus  caused  by  the  dropping  of  y 
and  v  in  the  above  cases  {21  h  and  22)  as  a  rule  remains. 
But  further  contraction  is  sometimes  actually  written  in  the 
Samhitas ;  e.  g.  sartavajau  for  sartava  ajau  (through 
sartavay  for  sartavai) ;  vasau  for  va  asau  (through  vay 
for  vai).  Sometimes,  again,  the  contraction,  though  not 
written,  is  required  by  the  metre.  Thus  ta  indra  must  be 
pronounced  as  tendra,  and  gostha  lipa  (AV.)  for  gosth^  lipa 
(through  gosthay)  as  gosthopa. 

Irregular  Vowel  Sandhi. 

23.  Vrddhi  instead  of  Guna  results  from  the  contraction  of 
a.  the  preposition  a  (in  the  AV.  and  VS.)  with  initial  r 

in  arti  =  a  rti  and  in  archatu  =  a  rchatu.  In  the  case  of 
the  latter  verb,  the  TS.  extends  this  contraction  to  prei^ositions 
ending  in  a :  liparchati  =  upa  rehati  and  avarchati  = 
ava  rehati. 


1  Because  e  and  o  were  originally  =  ai  and  au. 

2  Tliis  is  also  the  Sandhi  of  the  AB.  and  KB. 


23-25]  ABSENCE   OF  VOWEL  SANDHI  25 

h.  The  preposition  pra  (in  the  EV.)  with  initial  i  in 
praisayur  =  pra  isayui*. 

c.  The  augment  a  with  the  initial  vowels  i,  u,  r  ;'  e.  g. 
aichas  2.  s.  imj^f.  of  is  wish ;  aunat  3.  s.  impf.  of  ud  tvet ; 
arta  3,  s.  aor.  of  r  go. 

Absence  of  Vowel  Sandhi. 

24.  The  particle  u  is  unchangeable-  in  pronunciation 
before  vowels,  though  as  a  rule  written  as  v  after  a  con- 
sonant ;'  e.  g.  bha  u  amsave,  but  av6d  v  indra.  When  it 
combines  with  the  final  a  of  a  particle  to  o,  in  6  =  a 
u,  atho  =  atha  u,  uto  =  uta  u,  mo  =  ma  u,  it  remains 
unchanged  even  in  the  written  text ;  e,  g.  atho  indraya. 

25.  a.  The  i  and  u  of  the  dual  (nom.  ace.)  never  change 
to  y  and  v.  This  dual  i  is  never  to  be  pronounced  short, 
but  the  u  sometimes  is  ;  e.  g.  hari  (v^  -)  rtasya,  but  sadhu 
(-  w)  asmai.  This  i  may  remain  before  i,  as  in  hari  iva, 
but  in  several  instances  the  contraction  is  written,  as  in 
r6dasim6  =  rodasi  im6,  while  in  several  others,  though 
not  written,  it  must  be  pronounced. 

h.  The  rare  locatives  singular  in  i  and  u  are  also  regularly 
written  unchanged  in  the  EV.,''  but  they  seem  always  to  be 
treated  as  prosodically  short. 

c.  The  i  of  the  nom.  plur.  m.  (of  the  pronoun  asau)  ami 
is  always  given  as  unchangeable  in  the  Pada  text  (ami  iti), 
but  it  never  happens  to  occur  before  a  vowel  in  the  EV. 

*  This  is  perhaps  a  survival  of  a  prehistoric  contraction  of  a  (the 
original  form  of  the  augment)  witli  i,  u,  r  to  ai,  au,  ar. 

^  The  term  applied  by  the  native  phoneticians  to  uncliangeable 
vowels  is  pragrhya  separated.  Such  vowels  are  indicated  in  the  Pada 
text  by  an  appended  iti.  u  is  always  there  written  in  its  lengthened 
and  nasalized  form  as  iim  iti. 

2  It  is  occasionally  written  unchanged  in  its  lengthened  form  even 
after  a  consonant,  as  tdm  vi  akrnvan. 

*  Except  vedy  asyam,  to  be  pronounced  vedi  asyam. 


26  CONSONANT   SANDHI  [25-27 

a.  Tho  i  of  the  nora.  s.  in  prthivi,  prthu-jrdyi,  samrajiii  rarely,  of 
the  instr.  su^ami  once,  and  of  the  instr.  uti  often,  remains  unchanged 
before  vowels  ;^  o.  g.  sanirajni  ^dhi,  susfimi  abhuvan. 

26.  The  diphthong  e  is  unchangeable  in  various  nominal 
and  verbal  forms. 

a.  The  e  of  the  nom.  ace.  dual  {■=  a  +  i),  fern,  and  neut. 
of  a  stems,  is  not  liable  to  Sandhi ;  ^  e.  g.  rodasi  ubh6 
rghayamanam. 

h.  The  verbal  dual  e^  of  the  2.  3.  pres.  and  perf.  mid. 
never  combines,  though  it  is  nearly  always  prosodically 
shortened  ;  e.  g.  parimamnathe  asman. 

c.  The  e  of  the  locative  of  the  pronominal  forms  tv6 
in  thee,  asni6  ^  in  us,  yusm6  in  you  are  unchangeable ;  ^ 
e.  g.  tv6  it ;  asm6  ayuh  ;  yusm6  ittha. 

Combination  of  Final  and  Initial  Consonants. 

27.  The  external  Sandhi  of  consonants  is  primarily  and 
almost  exclusively  concerned  with  the  assimilation  of  a  final 
to  a  following  initial  sound.  Since  the  Sandhi  of  final 
consonants  generally  speaking  starts  from  the  form  they 
assume  in  pausa,"  it  is  necessary  to  state  the  law  of  allowable 
finals  at  the  outset.  That  law  may  be  formulated  as  follows : 
only  unaspirated  hard  mutes,  nasals,  and  Visarjanlya  are 
tolerated,  and  palatals  are  excluded,  as  finals.  By  this  law 
the  thirty-nine  consonants  classified  in  §  3  are  reduced  to 

*  The  unchangeableness  of  the  vowel  here  being  only  occasional  is 
not  indicated  with  iti  in  the  Pada  text. 

*  Except  dhisnyeme  for  dhisnye  im6,  as  it  is  also  probably  to  bo 
pronounced. 

^  Under  the  influence  of  the  nominal  dual  e  ;  for  there  was  origin- 
ally no  difference  between  this  dual  e  and  any  other  e  in  middle 
forms,  such  as  the  dual  vahe,  sing,  te,  aiad  the  plur.  ante. 

*  Also  used  as  dat.  in  the  RV. 

^  They  are  always  written  with  iti  in  the  Piida  text. 
®  Final  n  and  r  are,  however,  to  a  considerable  extent  treated  not 
on  the  basis  of  their  pausal  form,  but  of  etymology. 


27-28]     EXTERNAL   SANDHI   OF  CONSONANTS       27 

the  following  eight  as  permissible  in  pausa  : — k,  n ;  t ;  t,  n ; 
p,  m  ;  Visarjaniya. 

The  aspirate  and  soft  mutes  (3  b)  are  eliminated,  leaving 
only  hard  unaspirated  mutes  to  represent  them.  The  palatals 
(3  h  /3),  including  s  (3  d),  and  h  (3  e),  are  replaced  by  k  or  t 
(n  by  n). 

s  (3  d)  is  replaced  by  t,  s  (3  (7)  and  r  (3  c)  by  Visarjaniya. 
The  nasal  n  (Shy)  and  the  three  semivowels  y,  1,  v  (3  c) 
do  not  occur. 

28.  The  rule  is  that  only  a  single  consonant  may  be 
final.  Hence  all  but  the  first  of  a  group  of  consonants 
must  be  dropi^ed ;  e.  g.  abhavan  3.  pi.  impf.  were  (for 
abhavant) ;  tan  ace.  pi.  those  (for  tans) ;  tudan  striking 
(for  tudants) ;  pran  fonvard  (through  prank  for  pranc-s) ; 
aehan  3.  s.  aor.  has  pleased  (for  achantst). 

a.  k,  t,  or  t,  when  they  follow  an  r  and  belong  to  the 
root,  are  allowed  to  remain  ; '  e.  g.  vark  3.  s.  aor.  of  vrj 
hend  (for  vark-t) ;  urk  nom.  s.  of  urj  strength;  a-mart 
3.  s.  impf.  of  mrj  wipe  ;  a-vart  3.  s.  aor.  of  vrt  turn  ;  su-hart 
nom.  s.  of  suhard  friend. 

a.  There  are  seven  instances  in  the  Sanihitas  in  which  a  siiffixal  s  or 
t  is  retained  instead  of  the  preceding  radical  consonant.  (1)  s  tlius 
api^eara  in  the  following  four  nominatives  sing.  :  sadha-mas  beside 
sadha-mat  (for  sadha-mad-s)  companio7i  of  the  feast ;  ava-yas  (for  ava- 
yaj-s)  f.  sacrificial  share  ;  avayas  (for  avayaj-s)  ni.  a  kind  of  priest  ; 
puro-das  sacrificial  cake  (for  piiro-das-s).^  (2)  s  or  t  similarly  ajipears  in 
the  following  four  singular  verbal  preterite  forms  :  a-ya-s  (for  d-yaj-s) 
beside  a-yat  2  s.  aor.  of  yaj  sacrifice  ;  a-sras  (for  d-sraj-s)  2.  s.  aor.  of  srj 
emit ;  a-bhanas  (for  a-bhanak-s)  2.  s.  impf.  of  bhanj  break  ;  and  a-sra^ 
(for  a-sras-t)3  3.  s.  aor.  of  sras  fall. 


1  The  only  instance  of  a  suffix  remaining  after  r  is  in  dar-t  3.  s.  aor. 
of  dr  cleave  beside  d,-dar  2.  s.  (for  d-dar-s). 

-  The  s  is  probably  due  to  the  analogy  of  nominatives,  like  mas  moon, 
dravino-da-s  wealth-giver,  &c. 

3  The  appearance  of  s  or  t  here  is  due  to  the  beginnings  of  the 


28  EXTEKNAL   CONSONANT   SANDHl  [29 

Classification  of  Consonants. 

29.  The  assimilation,  of  which  the  application  of  the 
rules  of  consonant  Sandhi  consists,  is  of  two  kinds.  It  is 
concerned  either  with  a  shift  of  the  phonetic  position  in 
which  a  consonant  is  articulated,  or  with  a  change  of  the 
quality  of  the  consonant.  Hence  it  is  necessary  to  understand 
fully  the  classification  of  consonants  from  these  two  aspects. 
In  §Sh  c  d  (cp.  15,  2b-h)  an  arrangement  according  to  the 
place  of  articulation  is  given  of  all  the  consonants  except 
four,  the  breathing  h  and  the  three  voiceless  spirants,  which 
are  phonetically  described  in  §  15,  2  ij. 

a.  Contact  of  the  tongue  with  the  throat  produces  the 
gutturals,  with  the  palate  the  palatals,  with  the  roof  of 
th«  mouth  the  cerebrals,  with  the  teeth  the  dentals,  while 
contact  between  the  lips  produces  the  labials. 

b.  In  forming  the  nasals  of  the  five  classes,  the  breath 
partially  passes  through  the  nose  while  the  tongue  or  the 
lips  are  in  the  position  for  articulating  the  corresponding 
tenuis.  The  real  Anusvara  is  formed  in  the  nose  only, 
while  the  tongue  is  in  the  position  for  forming  the  particular 
vowel  which  the  Anusvara  accompanies. 

c.  The  semivowels  y,  r,  1,  v  are  palatal,  cerebral,  dental, 
and  labial  respectively,  pronounced  in  the  same  position  as 
the  corresponding  vowels  i,  r,  1,  u,  the  tongue  being  in 
partial  contact  with  the  place  of  articulation  in  the  first 
three,  and  the  lips  in  partial  contact  in  the  fourth. 

d.  The  three  sibilants  are  hard  spirants  produced  by 
partial  contact  of  the  tongue  with  the  palate,  roof,  and  teeth 
respectively.  There  are  no  corresponding  soft  sibilants 
(English  z,  French  j),  but  their  prehistoric  existence  may  be 
infei-red  from  various  phenomena  of  Sandhi  (cp.  15,  2  Jca). 


tendency  to  normalize  the  terminations  so  as  to  have  s  in  the  2.  s.  and 
t  in  the  3.  s.  Some  half-dozen  examples  of  this  have  been  found  in 
the  Brahmanas  ;  e.  g.  a-ves  2.  s.  impf.  (=  a-ved-s)  from  vid  knoiv. 


29-32]        EXTERNAL  CONSONANT   SANDHI  29 

e.  h  and  h  are  respectively  soft  and  hard  spirants  produced 
without  any  contact,  and  articulated  in  the  position  of  the 
vowel  that  precedes  or  follows,  h  occurs  only  before  soft 
letters,  h  only  after  vowels  and  before  certain  hard  letters. 

30.  Quality  of  consonants. 
Consonants  are 

1.  either  hard  (surd,  voiceless) :  k  kh,  c  ch,  t  th,  t  th, 
p  ph  ;  s  s  s  ;  h  h  h  (3) ; 

or  soft  (sonant,  voiced) :  all  the  rest  (3)  (besides  all  the 
vowels  and  diphthongs). 

2.  either  aspirated  :  kh  gh,  eh  jh,  th  dh  Ih,  th  dh, 
ph  bh,  h  h  h  h,  s  s  s  ; 

or  unaspirated  :  all  the  rest. 

Hence  the  change  of  c  to  k  is  a  change  of  the  position  of 
articulation  (palatal  to  guttural),  and  that  of  e  to  j  is  a 
change  of  quality  (hard  to  soft) ;  while  the  change  of  c  to  g 
(hard  palatal  to  soft  guttural)  or  of  t  to  j  (hard  dental  to  soft 
palatal)  is  one  of  both  position  and  quality. 

31.  It  is  essential  to  remember  that  consonant  Sandhi 
cannot  be  applied  till  finals  have  been  reduced  to  one  of  the 
eight  allowable  sounds  (27).  The  latter  are  then  modified 
without  reference  to  their  etymological  value  (except  partially 
in  the  case  of  n  and  Visarjaniya).  Only  six  of  these 
allowable  finals  occur  at  all  frequently,  viz.  k,  t,  n,  p,  m, 
and  Visarjaniya,  while  the  cerebral  t  and  the  guttural  n 
are  rare. 

I.    Changes  of  Quality. 

32.  A  final  consonant  (that  is,  a  mute  or  Visarjaniya)  is 
assimilated  in  quality  to  the  following  initial,  becoming  soft 
before  soft  initials,  and  remaining  hard  before  hard  initials 
(consonants). 

Hence  final  k,  t,  t,  p  before  vowels  and  soft  consonants 
become  g,  d,  d,  b  respectively  ;  e.  g.  arvag  radhah  (through 
arvak  for  arvae) ;  havyavad  jtihvasyah  (through  -vat  for 
-vah) ;  sal  urvih  (through  sat  for  sas  :    cp.  3  6  y) ;  gamad 


30  EXTERNAL   CONSONANT  SANDHI         [32-37 

vajebhih  (for  gdmat) ;  agnid  rtayatah  (through  agnit  for 
agnidh) ;  tristiib  gayatrl  (through  tristiip  for  tristubh)  ; 
abja  (for  ap-ja). 

33.  Final  k,  t,  t,  p  before  n  or  m  may,  and  in  practice 
regularly  do,  become  the  nasal  of  their  own  class ;  e.  g. 
pranan  martyasya  (through  pranag  for  pranak) ;  viran 
mitravarunayoh  (through  virad  for  virat) ;  san-navati  (TS.) 
(through  sat-)  for  sas-navati ;  asin  nd  (through  asid  for 
asit) ;  tan  mitrasya  (for  tad) ;  trikakum  nivartat  (through 
trikakub  for  trikakiip  from  trikakiibh). 

34.  Final  t  becomes  1  through  d ;  e.  g.  angal  lomnah 
(for  an  gat). 

35.  Since  the  nasals  have  no  corresponding  hard  sounds, 
they  remain  unchanged  in  quality  before  initial  hard  sounds. 
The  guttural  n,^  which  is  rare,  remains  otherwise  unmodified 
also  (cp.  52) ;  but  it  may  before  sibilants  insert  a  transitional 
k,  e.  g.  pratyank  sa  beside  pratydn  sa.  Final  m  is  liable  to 
change  of  position  before  all  consonants  (42).  Final  dental 
n  is  liable  to  change  before  vowels  (42,  52),  palatals,  dentals, 
the  semivowel  1,  and  sometimes  p  (40). 

36.  The  dental  nasal  n  remains  unchanged  before  (1)  the 
gutturals  k,  kh,  g,  gh;  (2)  the  labials  p,^  ph,  b,  bh,  m  ;  (3)  the 
soft  dentals  d,  dh,  n;  generally  also  before  t  (40,  2) ;  (4)  the 
semivowels  y,  r,  v,  and  the  breathing  h ;  (5)  the  cerebral 
and  the  dental  sibilants  s  and  s. 

a.  Before  s  and  s  a  transitional  t  may  be  inserted, 
e.g.  ahan-t  sahasa  ;  tan-t  sam. 

II.    Changes  of  Position. 

37.  The  only  four  final  consonants  (27)  liable  to  change  of 
position  are  the  dental  t  and  n,  the  labial  m,  and  Visar- 
janiya. 

^  The  palatal  and  cerebral  nasals,  as  has  already  been  stated,  do  not 
occur  as  finals. 
^  Before  p  it  sometimes  becomes  mh  ;  cp.  40,  5. 


37-40]         EXTERNAL   CONSONANT  SANDHl  31 

a.  The  two  dentals  become  palatal  before  palatals.' 
h.  Visarjanlya  and  m  adapt  themselves  to  the  phonetic 
position  of  the  following  consonant. 

1.  Final  t. 

38.  Final  t  before  palatals  (c,  j,  ch,  s)  is  changed  to  a 
palatal  (e  or  j)  ;  e.g.  tac  eaksuh  for  tat  caksuh;  yatayaj- 
jaaa  for  yatayat-jana;  rohic  chyava  for  rohit  syava.- 

2.  Final  n. 

39.  Final  n  before  vowels  is  changed,  after  a  long  vowel, 
to  Anusvara :  if  the  preceding  vowel  is  a,  to  m,  if  it  is  i,  u, 
f,  to  mr  ;"  e.  g.  sargam  iva  for  sargan  ;  vidvam  agne  for 
vidvan ;  paridhimr  ati  for  paridhm ;  abhisumr  iva  for 
abhisiin  :  nrmr*  abhi  for  nrn. 

40.  1.  Final  n  before  all  palatals  that  occur  becomes 
palatal  fi ;  e.g.  urdhvan  carathaya  for  urdhvan ;  tafi 
jusetham  for  tan ;  vajrin  snathihi  for  vajrin ;  but  since 
before  s  a  transitional  t  may  be  inserted,  vajrnt  snathihi 
may  (through  vajrinc  ■'  snathihi)  become  vajrn  chnathihi.'' 

a.  Before  c  the  palatal  sibilant  is  sometimes  inserted '^  in 
the  EV.,  the  preceding  n  then  becoming  Anusvara.     This 

'  Final  dentals  never  come  into  contact  with  initial  cerebrals  in 
the  Sainhitas.  No  initial  cerebral  mutes  occur  in  the  RV.,  and  even 
the  cerebral  sibilant  s  occurs  only  in  sds  six  and  its  compounds,  and 
once  in  sat  for  sat  from  sah. 

2  On  the  change  of  s  to  eh  after  c  see  53. 

^  Both  m  and  mr  here  represent  original  ns  through  mh,  the  Sandhi 
of  h  being  here  the  same  as  that  of  ah  ih  uh  rh  before  vowels,  an  in 
Tin  remain  unchanged  at  the  end  of  a  Pada  (as  being  in  pausa)  before 
a  vowel ;  e.  g.  devayanan '  atandrah  (i.  72''). 

*  fmr  occurs  only  once,  otherwise  remaining  unchanged  as  fn, 
because  two  r  sounds  are  avoided  in  the  same  syllable  (cf.  Vedic 
Orammar,  §  79). 

5  That  is,  t  before  s  becomes  c  (38). 

«  That  is,  after  c  initial  s  may  become  ch  (53). 

'  There  are  no  examples  of  the  inserted  sibilant  before  ch  in  the 
Samhitas. 


32  EXTERNAL   CONSONANT   SANDHI         [40-41 

insertion  takes  place,  only  when  the  sibilant  is  etymologically 
justified/  almost  exclusively  (though  not  without  exception 
even  here  ^)  before  ca  and  cid ;  e.  g.  anuyajams  ca, 
amenams  eit.  In  the  later  Samhitas  the  inserted  sibilant 
becomes  commoner,  occurring  even  where  not  etymologi- 
cally justified.^ 

2.  Final  n  usually  remains  unchanged  before  dental  t,'' 
e.  g.  tvavan  tmana ;  but  the  dental  sibilant  is  sometimes 
inserted  in  the  RV.,  the  preceding  n  then  becoming 
Anusvara.  This  insertion  takes  place,  only  when  the 
sibilant  is  historically  justified;^  e.g.  avadarns  tvam  (for 
avadan).  In  the  later  Samhitas  the  inserted  sibilant 
becomes  commoner,  occurring  even  where  not  etymo- 
logically justified.^ 

3.  Final  n  before  initial  1  always  becomes  nazalized  1; 
e.  g.  jigival  laksam. 

4.  Though  final  n  generally  remains  unchanged  before 
y,  r,  V,  h  (36,  4),  an,  in,  tin  sometimes  become  am,  imr,  urar 
as  before  vowels  (39) ;  e.  g,  devan  havamahe ;  Ijut  svavam 
yatu  (for  svavan) ;  dadvam  va  (for  dadvan) ;  pivo-annam 
rayivrdhah  (for  annan) ;  panimr  hatam  (for  panin) ;  das- 
5ru.mr  yonau  (for  dasyun). 

5.  Final  n  when  etymologically  representing  ns  sometimes 
becomes  mh  before  p  (36,  2) ;  thus  nrmh  pahi  (for  nrn)  ; 
nfmh  patram ;  svatavamh  payiih  (for  svatavan). 

3.  Final  m. 

41.  Final  m  remains  unchanged  before  vowels  ;  e.g. 
agnim  ile  I  praise  Agni. 

^  That  is,  in  the  nom.  s.  and  ace.  pi.  m.,  whicli  originally  ended 
in  ns. 

^  E.g.  pa^un  ca  sthatrn  car^tham  (i.  72^). 

^  As  in  the  3.  pi.  impf.,  e.  g.  dbhavan  (originally  abhavan-t'  and  the 
voc.  and  loc.  of  n  stems,  e.  g.  rajan  (which  never  ended  in  s). 

*  No  initial  th  occurs  in  the  RV. 


41-42]        EXTEKNAL   CONSONANT   SANDHI        .     33 

a.  In  a  very  few  instances  the  m  is  dropped  and  the  vowels  there- 
upon contract.  This  Sandhi  is  mostly  indicated  by  the  metre  only  : 
thus  rastram  ihil  must  be  pronounced  rastr6ha.  It  is  very  rarely 
written,  as  in  durgahait^t  for  diirg^hani  etat.  The  Pada  text,  however, 
neither  here  (durg^ha  etat)  nor  elsewhere  analyses  a  contraction  in 
this  way. 

42.  Final  m  before  consonants  is  changed 

1.  before  the  semivowel  r,  the  three  sibilants  s,  s,  s 
and  the  breathing  h  to  Anusvara ;  e.  g.  hotaram  ratnadha- 
tamam  (for  hotaram) ;  vardhamanam  sve  (for  vardha- 
manam) ;  mitram  huve  (for  mitram).^ 

2.  before  y,  1,  v  it  becomes  nasalized  y,  1,  v ;  but  the 
printed  texts  regularly  use  Anusvara  -  instead  ;  e.  g.  sam 
yudhi ;  yajnam  vastu.' 

3.  before  mutes  it  becomes  the  class  nasal, ^  and  n  before 
n  '^ ;  e.g.  bhadraii  karisyasi ;  tyan  camasam ;  navan 
tvastuh. ;  bhadran  nah.  Most  MSS.  and  the  printed  texts, 
however,  represent  this  assimilated  m  by  Anusvara  ^ ;  e.  g. 
bhadram  karisyasi ;  tyam  camasam ;  navam  tvastuh ; 
bhadram  nah. 

a.  This  Sandhi  is  identical  with  that  of  u  befoi-e  the  palatals  c,j,  ch 
(40)  and  the  soft  dentals  d,  dh,  u  (36,  3),  and  of  t  before  n  (33). 

'  Anusvara  seems  to  have  been  used  originally  before  the  sibilants 
and h  only.  Compounds  like  saiu-raj  show  that  m  originally  remained 
unchnnged  before  r  (49  h). 

2  The  Taittiriya  Prati^akhya  allows  the  optional  use  of  Anusvara 
before  these  semivowels. 

^  Forms  with  internal  m  like  yam-y^mana  and  Spa-mlukta  show 
that  m  originally  remained  unchanged  in  extei'nal  Sandhi  before  y 
and  1 ;  and  forms  like  jagan-van  (from  gam  go)  point  to  its  having 
at  one  time  become  n  before  v  in  Sandhi. 

*  Before  labials  it  of  course  remains. 

^  This  assimilation  befoi'e  n  being  identical  with  that  of  d,  led  to 
ambiguity  in  some  instances  and  consequent  wrong  analysis  by  the 
Padapatha. 

"  Max  Miiller  in  his  editions  prints  Anusvara  throughout,  even 
befoi'e  labials  ;  Aufrecht  has  Anusvara  except  before  labials,  where 
he  retains  m. 

1819  D 


34  EXTEKNAL   CONSONANT   SANDHI  [43 

4.    Final  Visarjaniya. 

43.  Visarjaniya  is  the  spirant  to  which  the  hard  s  and 
the  corresponding  soft  r  are  reduced  in  pausa.  If  followed 
by  a  hard  sound, 

1.  a  palatal  (c,  ch)  or  a  dental  (t)  mute,  it  becomes  the 
corresponding  sibilant ;  e.  g.  devas  eakrma  (through  devah 
for  devas) ;  pus  ca  (through  puh  ca  for  piir  ca,) ; '  yas  te 
(for  yah)  ;  anvibhis  tana  (for  -bhih). 

a.  Visarjaniya,  if  preceded  by  i  and  u,  before  dental  t  often  becomes 
cerebral  s,  which  cerebralizes  the  following  initial  t  to  t.  In  the  RV. 
this  occurs  chiefly,  and  in  the  later  Vedas  only,  before  pronouns ; 
e.  g.  agnis  te  ;  kratus  tarn  ;  also  n^kis  tanusu.  In  compounds  this 
change  takes  place  in  all  the  Sanihitas  ;  e.  g.  dus-tara  hard  to  pass.^ 

2.  a  guttural  (k,  kh)  or  labial  (p,  ph)  mute,  it  either 
remains  or  becomes  Jihvamullya  (h)  before  the  gutturals 
and  UpadhmanTya  (h)  before  the  labials ;  e.  g.  visnoh 
karmani  (for  visnos) ;  indrah.  panca  (for  indras) ;  punah- 
punah  (for  punar)  ;  dyauh  prthivl. 

a.  After  a  it  often,  in  the  RV.,  becomes  s,  and  s  after  i,  u,  r  ;^  e.  g.  divds 
pari ;  pdtnivatas  krdhi ;  dyaus  pita.  In  compounds  this  change 
takes  place  regularly  in  all  the  Samhitas  ;  e.  g. -pareis-pa,  far-proiectitig  ; 
havis-pa  drinking  the  offering  ;  dus-krt  evil-doing,  dus-p£d  evil-footed. 

3.  a  simple  sibilant,  it  either  remains  or  is  assimilated ; 
e.  g.  vah  sivatamah.  or  vas  sivatamah ;  d6vih  sat  or  d6vis 
sat ;  nah  sapatnah  or  nas  sapatnah  ;  piinah,  sam  or  punas 
sam.^     Assimilation   is  undoubtedly  the  original   Sandhi ; 

^  This  combination  (in  which  Visarjaniya  i-ejiresents  original  r)  is 
contrary  to  etymology,  but  is  universal  in  sentence  Sandhi  and  is 
subject  to  only  two  exceptions  in  compounds  :  svar-caksas  and  svar- 
canas. 

~  The  only  exception  in  the  RV.  is  catus-trimsat  thirty-four. 

2  This  treatment  before  gutturals  and  labials  corresponds  to  that 
before  t  (1  a),  and  was  doubtless  the  original  one  in  sentence  Sandhi. 

*  This  combination  (in  which  Visarjaniya  represents  original  r), 
though  contrary  to  etymology,  is  universal  in  external  Sandhi ;  but 


43-46]        EXTERNAL   CONSONANT   SANDHI  35 

but   the  MSS.   usually  employ  Visarjaniya  and   European 
editions  regularly  do  so. 

a.  Before  a  sibilant  immediately  followed  by  a  hard  mute,  a  final 
Visarjaniya  is  dropped ;  e.  g.  mandibhi  stomebhih  (through  mandi- 
bhih  for  mandibhis) ;  du-stuti  f.  ill-praise  (for  dus-stuti).  The  dropping 
is  i>rescribed  by  the  Prati^akhyas  of  the  RV.,  the  VS.,  and  the  TS., 
and  is  applied  by  Aufrecht  in  his  edition  of  the  RV. 

b.  Before  a  sibilant  immediately  followed  by  a  nasal  or  semivowel, 
a  final  Visarjaniya  is  optionally  dropped  ;  e  g.  krta  sravah  (for  krtah) ; 
ni-svarani  (through  nih-  foi-  uis-). 

44.  Visarjaniya  (except  after  a  or  a)  before  a  soft  sound 
(vowel  or  consonant)  is  changed  to  r;  e.g.  rsibhir  idyah 
(through  rsibhih  for  rslbhis) ;  agnir  h6ta  (through  agnih 
for  agnis) ;  paribhur  asi  (through  -bhuh  for  -bhus). 

45.  1.  The  final  syllable  ah  (=  as)  drops  its  Visarjaniya 
before  vowels  or  soft  consonants ;  e.  g.  suta  ini6  (through 
sutah  for  sutas) ;  visva  vi  (through  visvah  for  visvas). 

2.  The  final  syllable  ah  (=  as) 

a.  drops  its  Visarjaniya  before  vowels  except  a ;  e.  g. 
khya  a  (through  khyah  for  khyas). 

h.  before  soft  consonants  and  before  a,  is  changed  to  o, 
after  which  a  may  be  elided  (21  a)  ;  e.  g.  indavo  vara 
(through  indavah  for  indavas) ;  no  ati  (through  nah  for 
nas)  or  no  'ti. 

46.  The  final  syllables  ah  (=  ar)  and  ah  (=  ar),  in  the 
comparatively  few  instances '  in  which  the  Visarjaniya 
represents  an  etymological  r,  do  not  form  an  exception  (45) 
to  the  general  rule  (44) ;  e.  g.  pratar  agnih  ;  piinar  nah  ; 
svar  druhah  ;  var  avayati. 

in  compounds  the  original  r  frequently  remains  ;  e.  g.  vanar-sad, 
dhur-sdd,  &c.  This  survival  shows  that  r  originally  remained  before 
sibilants  in  sentence  Sandhi, 

1  r  is  original  in  dvar  door,  var  protector,  var  water  ;  ahar  day,  us^r 
daini,  udhar  udder,  vadhar  weapon,  vanar  icood,  svar  light ;  ant^r  within, 
avdr  down,  piinar  again,  pratar  early  ;  the  voc,  of  r  stems,  e.g.  bhratar  ; 
the  2. 3.  s.  of  past  tenses  from  roots  in  r,  e.  g.  avar,  from  vr  cover. 

D  2 


36  EXTEENAL   CONSONANT   SANDHI        [47-49 

47.  r  followed  by  r  is  always  dropped,  a  preceding  short 
vowel  being  lengthened  ;  e.  g.  puna  rupani  for  punar.^ 

48.  The  three  pronouns  (nom.  m.  s.)  sah  that,  syah  that, 
esah  this,  drop  the  Visarjanlya  before  all  consonants  ;  '^  e.  g. 
sa  vanani,  sya  dutali,  esa  tarn.  The  Visarjaniya  is  here 
otherwise  treated  regularly ;  ■*  at  the  end  of  a  Pada,  e.  g. 
padista  sah  i  cakra  esah  i ,  and  before  vowels,  e.  g.  s6  apah, 
eso  asura,  eso  'manclan  (for  amandan) ;  sd  osadhih,  esd 
indrah. 

a.  sd,  however,  generally  combines  in  the  EV.  with  a  following 
vowel  ;  e.  g.  sasmai  for  sk  asmai ;  sed  for  sd  id  ;  s^usadhih  for  sa 
osadhih. 

Sandhi  in  Compounds. 

49.  The  euphonic  combination  at  the  junction  of  the 
members  of  compounds  is  on  the  whole  subject  to  the  rules 
prevailing  in  external  Sandhi.  Thus  the  evidence  of  metre 
shows  that  contracted  vowels  are  often  to  be  pronounced 
with  hiatus  when  the  initial  vowel  of  the  second  member  is 
prosodically  long  (cp.  18  h) ;  e.  g.  yukta-asva  (for  yuktasva) 
having  yoked  horses,  deva-iddha  Jcindled  htj  the  gods  (for 
dev6ddha),  aeha-ukti  (for  aehokti)  invitation. 

Compounds  have,  however,  preserved  many  archaisms  of 
Sandhi  which  have  disappeared  from  Sandhi  in  the  sentence. 

a.  In  vis-pati  lord  of  the  house  and  vis-pd.tni  mistress  of  the  house  s 
remains  instead  of  the  i*  required  by  external  Sandhi. 

b.  In  sam-raj  sovereign  ruler  m  appears  instead  of  the  Anusvara 
required  befoi'e  r  (42,  1),  as  in  sam-rajantam. 

'  In  a  few  instances  o  appears  instead  of  a  (=  ar)  under  the  influence 
of  ah  as  the  pausal  form  of  neuters  in  as  ;  e.  g.  iidho  romasfim  (for 
iadha  =  iidhar) ;  also  in  the  comioound  aho-ratra  for  aha-. 

2  sdh,  however,  twice  retains  it  in  the  RV.  ;  si,h.  paliknih  (v.  2*) 
and  sds  tava  (viii.  33^^)  for  sah. 

^  sydh  never  occurs  in  the  RV.  before  a  vowel  or  at  the  end  uf 
a  Padn. 

■'  vis-pati  has  in  post-Vedic  Sanskrit  become  vitpati. 


49-50]        EXTERNAL   CONSONANT   SANDHI  37 

c.  A  group  of  compounds  formed  with  dus  ill  ;is  first  meml)er  com- 
bine that  adverb  with  a  following  d  and  n  to  du-d  (=  duz-d)  and  du-n 
(  =  duz-n)  instead  of  dur-d  and  dur-n ;!  du-dabha  (for  dus-dd.bha)  liard 
to  deceive,  du-das  not  worshipping  (for  dus-das),  du-dhi  malevolent  (for 
dus-dhi);  dii-ndsa  hard  to  attain  (for  dur-n^sa),  du-nasa  (for  dus-nasa) 
hard  to  attain  and  hard  to  destroy, 

d.  Final  (etymological)  r  in  the  first  member  is  preserved  in  the 
RV.  before  hard  sounds  where  the  rules  of  external  Sandhi  require 
Visaj-janiya  or  a  sibilant  (43):  -v&v-^&VYi.  producing  water ;  svd,r-caksas 
brilliant  as  light;  pur-pati  lord  of  the  stronghold,  svar-pati  lord  of  lieaven; 
vanar-sad  and  vanar-s^d  sitting  in  the  loood,  dhur-sad  hdng  on  the  yoke  ; 
svar-sa  winning  light;  sv&,r-sati  acquisition  oflight.^  The  VS.  also  has 
ahar-pdti  lord  of  day,  and  dhur-sah.  bearing  the  yoke.^ 

e.  Radical  stems  in  ir,  ur  mostly  lengthen  their  vowel  before  con 
sonants  (as  they  do  within  the  simple  word); 2  e.g.  dhiir-sad  being  on 
the  yoke,  pur-yana  leading  to  the  fort.* 

50.  Compounds  further  often  contain  archaisms  which 
though  still  existing  in  external  Sandhi  are  obsolescent  and 
disappear  entirely  in  later  periods  of  the  language. 

a.  In  six  compounds  scandra  bright  retains  its  old  initial 
sibilant  in  the  second  member ;  e.  g.  asva-scandra  brilliant 
with  horses,  puru-scandra  veri/  brilliant.  As  an  independent 
word  it  is,  excepting  three  occurrences  in  the  RV.,  invariably 
candra.^ 

b.  A  final  s  of  the  first  meml^er  or  an  initial  s  of  the 
second  member  is  cerebralized  ;  e.  g.  dus-tara  hard  to  cross, 
duh-saha  hard  to  resist.^ 


1  But  dvLT'  the  form  required  by  the  later  external  Sandhi  is 
already  commoner  in  the  RV.  ;  e.  g.  dur-dfsika,  dur-naman. 

2  Nouns  ending  in  radical  r  retain  the  r  before  the  ending  su  of  the 
loc.  pi.  ;  gir-sii,  dhiir-su,  pur-sii. 

3  External  Sandhi  gradually  encroaches  here  in  the  later  Samhitas  j 
e.  g.  svah-pati  in  the  SV. 

*  But  glr  retains  its  short  vowel  in  gir-vanas  fond  of  praise  and  gfr- 
vahas  praised  in  song. 

^  How  nearly  extinct  scandr^  is  as  an  independent  word  is  indicated 
by  the  fact  that  in  the  analysis  of  its  six  compounds  it  always  appears 
as  candra  in  the  Padapatha. 

In  post-Vedic  Sanskrit  only  dustara,  duhsaha. 


G 


38  EXTERNAL   CONSONANT   SANDHI        [50-51 

c.  A  dental  n  in  the  second  member  is  cerebralized  after 
r,  r,  s  in  the  first  member : 

a.  almost  invariably,  whether  initial,  medial,  or  final  in  a  root,  when 
a  vcrlial  derivative  is  compounded  with  a  preposition  that  contains  r  ; 
e.  g.  nir-nij  f.  bright  garment,  p^ri-hnuta  denied,  pran-d  m.  breedh  ;  and 
even  in  suffixes,  as  pra-yana  n.  advance  (from  ya  go). 

0.  predominantly  in  other  comi^ounds  wlien  the  second  member  is 
a  verbal  noun;  e.g.  grama-ni  chief  of  a  village,  dur-gani  dangers,  pitr- 
yana  trodden  by  the  fathers,  rakso-han  demon-slaying  ;  but  puro-yavan 
beside  pratar-yavan  going  out  early.  Cerebralization  never  takes  place 
in  -ghn  the  weak  form  of  -han  killing;  nor  in  aksa-nah  tied  to  the  axle, 
kravya-vahana  conveying  corpses,  carma-mna  tanner,  yusma-nita  led 
by  you. 

y.  less  regularly  when  tlie  second  member  is  an  ordinary  (non- 
verbal) noun  ;  e.  g.  uru-nasa  broad-nosed,  prS-napat  great-grandson  ;  but 
candra-nirnij  having  a  brilliant  garment,  piinar-nava  again  renewed. 

d.  The  final  vowel  of  the  first  member  is  often  lengthened, 
especially  before  v ;  e.  g.  anna-vrdh  prospering  hi/  food. 
This  is  often  due  to  an  old  rhythmical  tendency  (also 
appearing  in  the  sentence)  to  lengthen  a  vowel  before 
a  single  consonant  between  two  short  syllables  ;  e.  g. 
ratha-sah  able  to  draw  the  ear. 

e.  Final  a  or  i  of  the  first  member  is  often  shortened 
before  a  group  of  consonants  or  a  long  syllable  ;  e.  g.  lirna- 
mradas  soft  as  wool  (urna) ;  prthivi-stha  standing  on  the 
earth  (prthivi) ;  am.iva-catana  driving  away  disease  (amiva). 

Doubling  of  Consonants. 
51.  The  palatal  ch  etymologically  represents  a  double 
sound  and  metrically  lengthens  a  preceding  short  vowel. 
For  the  latter  reason  the  RV.  Pratisakhya  prescribes  the 
doubling  of  ch  (in  the  form  of  cch)  after  a  short  vowel,  and, 
as  regards  long  vowels,  after  a  only,  when  a  vowel  follows.' 
This  rule  is  followed  by  Max  Muller  in  his  editions  of  the 
RV.  ;  e.  g.  uta  echadih,  a-cchad-vidhana,  but  me  chantsat. 

1  The  Vedic  MSS.  almost  invariably  write  the  simple  ch,  and  this 
practice  is  followed  by  Aufrecht  in  his  edition  of  the  Rigveda  and 
L.  v.  Schrocder  in  his  edition  of  the  MS.  It  is  also  followed  in  the 
present  work. 


52-56]         EXTEENAL   CONSONANT   SANDHI  39 

52.  Before  vowels  final  n  and  n,  if  preceded  ])y  a  short 
vowel,  are  doubled  ;  e.  g,  kidrnn  indrah ;  ahann  indrah. 
Though  the  nasal  is  always  written  double,  the  metre  shows 
that  this  rule  is  only  partially  applied  as  regards  pronun- 
ciation in  the  RV. 

a.  Tlie  compound   vrsan-asvd  loitJt    stallions    as   steeds  (n  =  n)  is  an 
exception. 

Initial  Aspiration. 

53.  After  a  final  c,  initial  s  regularly  becomes  eh  ;  e.  g. 
yae  chaknavama  for  yad  saknavama. 

a.  The  same  change  occasionally  takes  place  after  t ;  thus 
vipat  ehutudri  (for  sutudri) ;  turasat  chusmi  (for  susmi). 

54.  Initial  h,  after  softening  a  preceding  k,  t,  t,  p,  is 
changed  to  the  soft  aspirate  of  that  mute ;  e,  g.  sadhryag 
ghita  for  hita ;  avad  dhavyani  for  avat  havyani ;  sidad 
dhota  for  sidat  hota. 

55.  If  gh,  dh,  bh,  or  h  are  at  the  end  of  a  (radical) 
S5'llable  beginning  with  g,  d,  or  b,  and  lose  their  aspiration 
as  final  or  otherwise,  the  initial  consonants  are  aspirated  by 
way  of  compensation  ;  ^  e.  g.  from  dagh  reach  the  3.  s, 
injunctive  is  dhak  (for  dagh-t) ;  -budh  icahing  becomes 
-bhut ;  duh  milking  becomes  dhiik. 

B.  Internal  Sandhi. 

56.  The  rules  of  internal  Sandhi  apply  to  the  finals  of 
roots  and  nominal  and  verbal  stems  before  all  endings  of  de- 
clension (except  those  beginning  with  consonants  of  the 
middle  stem :  73  a)  and  conjugation,  before  primary  suffixes 
(182,  1)  and  before  secondary  suffixes  (182,  2)  beginning 
with  a  vowel  or  y.  Many  of  these  rules  agree  with  those 
of  external  Sandhi.  The  most  important  of  those  which 
differ  fi-om  external  Sandhi  are  the  following : 

'  This  is  not  really  compensation  but  the  survival  of  the  original 
initial  aspiration  of  such  roots,  which  was  lost  owing  to  the  avoidance 
of  an  aspirate  at  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  same  syllable.  Hence 
when  the  final  aspirate  disappeared,  the  initial  returned. 


40  INTERNAL   .SANDHI  [57-61 

Final  Vowels. 

57.  In  many  cases  before  a  vowel  i  is  changed  to  iy  ; 
u  and  u  to  uv ;  e.  g.  dhi  +  e  =  dhiy-6  dat.  s.  for  thought ; 
bhu  +  i  =  bhuv-i  on  earth  ;  yu-joiv-^  has  joined  (-/yu). 

58.  Final  r  before  y  becomes  ri  (154,  3) ;  e.  g.  kr  rnahc : 
kri-yate  3.  s.  pres.  pass,  is  done.  Final  r  before  consonant 
terminations  is  changed  to  ir,  after  labials  to  iir  ;  e.  g,  gr 
siuallow :  gir-yate  is  swallowed,  gir-na  swallowed ;  pr  Jill : 
pur-yate  is  filled,  pur-na  filled. 

59.  e,  ai,  o,  au  are  changed  before  suffixes  beginning 
with  vowels  or  y  to  ay,  ay,  av,  av  respectively  ;  e.  g. 
se  +  u  =  say-ii  lying ;  rai  +  e  =  ray-6  for  wealth ;  go  +  e  = 
gav-e  for  a  cow;  nau  +  i  =  nav-i  in  a  boat;  go  +  ya  = 
gav-ya  relating  to  cows. 

Final  Consonants. 

60.  The  most  notable  divergence  from  external  Sandhi  is 
the  unchangeableness  of  the  final  consonants  (cp.  32)  of 
roots  and  verbal  or  nominal  stems  before  suffixes  and 
terminations  beginning  with  vowels,  semivowels  and  nasals 
(while  before  other  letters  they  usually  follow  the  rules  of 
external  Sandhi);  e.g.  vac-ya  to  he  spoken,  duras-yu 
worshipping,  yasas-vat  glorious ;  vac-mi  I  speak  (but  vakti 
speaks) ;  voc-am  I  will  speak,  paprc-yat  would  mix ;  prane- 
ah  nom.  pi.  forward. 

a.  Before  the  primaiy  suffix  na,  d  is  assimilated ;  e.  g.  an-na  n.  food 
(for  ad-na),  ehin-nd  cut  off  (for  chid-na) ;  and  before  the  secondary 
suffixes  mant  and  niaya,  t  and  d ;  e.g.  vidyun-mant  accompanied  by 
lightning  (yidyut)  and  mrn-niaya  consisting  o/chiy  (mfd).  In  the  nominal 
case-form  san-nam  (for  sat-nam)  of  six  (sds)  the  final  t  is  assimilated. 

61.  Nominal  or  verbal  stems  ending  in  consonants  and 
followed  by  terminations  consisting  of  a  single  consonant, 
drop  the  termination  altogether,  two  consonants  not  being 
tolerated  at  the  end  of  a  word  (28).  The  final  consonant 
that  remains  is  then  treated  according  to  the  rules  of  external 


G1-G3]        INTERNAL   CONSONANT   SANDHI  41 

Sandhi.  Thus  pranc  +  s  nom.  s.  forward  becomes  pran 
(the  s  being  first  dropped,  the  palatals  being  changed  to 
gutturals  by  27,  and  the  k  being  then  dropped  by  28) ; 
similarly  a-doh  + 1  =  a-dhok  he  milked  (55). 

62.  Aspirates  followed  by  any  sounds  except  vowels, 
semivowels  or  nasals  (60)  lose  their  aspiration  ;  e.  g.  randh  + 
dhi  =  rand-dhi '  2.  s.  aor.  impv.  subject;  labh  +  sya-te  = 
lap-syate  (B.)  3.  s.  fut,  tvill  take ;  but  yudh-i  in  battle  ; 
a-rabh-ya  seising. 

a.  A  lost  soft  aspirate  is,  if  possible,  thrown  back  before 
dhv,  bh,  s  (55)  ;  e.  g.  ind-dhvam  2.  pi.  impv.  of  indh 
Jcindle ;  bhud-bhis  inst.  pi.,  bhut-sii  loc.  pi.  But  before  s 
this  rule  applies  only  partially ;  thus  from  dabh  harm  :  des. 
dip-sa-ti  desires  to  injure,  dip-su  intending  to  hurt ;  bhas 
chciv :  baps-a-ti  chews  ;  guh  hide :  des,  ju-guk-sa-tas  beside 
aghuksat ;  dah  hum :  part,  daksat  beside  dhaksant ;  duh 
milk :  aor.  a-duksat  beside  a-dhuksat. 

h.  But  it  is  thrown  forward  on  a  following  t  and  th/ 
which  are  softened  ;  e.  g.  rabh  +  ta  =  rab-dha  seized  ; 
runadh  +  ti  =  runad-dhi  ;  rundh  +  tam  =  rund-dham  3.  s. 
impv.  let  him  obstruct. 

63.  Palatals,  a.  While  c  regularly  becomes  guttural 
before  consonants  (cf.  61  ;  27  ;  7  b),  j  in  some  cases  (the 
majority)  becomes  guttural  (k,  g),^  in  others  cerebral  (t,  d,  s) ; 

'  For  the  Vedic  language  tolerates  two  aspirates  neither  at  the 
beginning  and  the  end  of  the  same  syllable,  nor  at  the  end  of  one  and 
the  beginning  of  the  next.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  loss  of 
aspiration  in  the  root  if  an  aspirate  (after  a  vowel)  which  belongs  to  a 
suffix  or  a  second  member  of  a  compound  follows  ;  e.  g.  vibhu-bhis 
with  the  Vibhus ;  garbha-dhi  m.  breeding-place.  (The  two  imperatives  bo- 
dhi  be  for  bho-dhi,  and  ja-hi  strike  for  jha-hi,  follow  the  general  rule.) 

'^  Except  in  the  case  of  the  root  dha  2)Z«ce,  the  weak  stem  of  which 
dadli  (following  the  analogy  of  62«)  becomes  dhat  before  t  and  th 
(cf.  134  B  b). 

*  j  always  becomes  k  before  a  conjugational  s  (cp.  144,  4) ;  e.  g.  mrk- 
sva  2.  s.  impv.  of  rarj  wipe. 


42  TNTEENAL   CONSONANT  SANDHI        [63-65 

e.  g.  uk-ta  spoken  (-/vac) ;  yuk-ta  joined  ('/yiij) ;  rug-na 
broken  (\/ruj:  cp.  65);  but  rat  nom.  s.  king  (for  raj +  s); 
mrd-dhi  2.  s.  impv.  wipe  (for  mrj-dhi) ;  ras-tra  kingdom  (for 
raj-tra:  cp.  64). 

b.  The  palatal  s  before  bh  (73  a)  normally  becomes  d ;  ^ 
k  before  s  ;  -  always  s  before  t  and  th  (cp.  64)  ;  e.  g.  pad- 
bhis  with  looks  (pas),  vid-bhis  ivith  tribes  (vis) ;  vek-syasi 
fut.  of  vis  enter ;  vik-su  loc.  pi.  (vis) ;  dik  nom.  s.  of  dis 
direction  ;  nak  nom.  s.  of  nas  night ;  vis-ta  entered  (-/vis). 

c.  c  and  j  (not  s)  palatalize  a  following  n  ;  e.  g.  yaj  +  na  = 
yaj-na  sacrifice,  but  pras-na  question. 

d.  The  ch  of  the  root  prach  ask  is  treated  like  s : 
a-prak-sit  3.  s.  sis-  aor.,  a-prat  3.  s.  s-  aor.  (=  a-prach-s-t) ; 
prs-ta  asked,  pras-tum  inf.  to  ask. 

64.  Cerebrals  change  following  dentals  to  cerebrals  (39); 
e.  g.  is  +  ta  :=  is-ta ;  av-is  +  dhi  =  avid-dhi  2.  s.  impv.  is- 
aor.  of  av ;  san  +  nam  (for  sat-nam)  =  san-nam  (cp.  33, 60  a). 

a.  While  the  cerebral  sibilant  s  seems  always'  to  be- 
come a  cerebral  mute  (t  or  d)  in  declension  and  becomes 
d  in  conjugation,  it  regularly  becomes  k  before  s  in  conju- 
gation (cp.  63  b  and  67) ;  e.  g,  dvis  +  s  =  dvit  nom.  s.  hating, 
vi-prxis  +  s  =  vi-priit  droj),  vi-prud-bhis  inst.  pi.  ;  av-is  + 
dhi  =  avid-dhi  2.  s.impv.  is-  aor.  of  av  favour  ;  dvis  +  sa-t  = 
dvik-sat  3.  s.  inj.  sa-  aor.  of  dvis  hate. 

65.  Change  of  dental  n  to  cerebral  n. 

A  preceding  cerebral  r,  f,  r,  s  (even  though  vowels,  gut- 
tural or  labial  mutes  or  nasals,  y,  v,  or  h  intervene)  changes 
a  dental  n  (followed  by  a  vowel  or  n,  m,  y,  v)  to  cerebral  n  ; 
e.  g.  nr  +  nam  =  nrnam  of  men  ;  pit?  +  nam  =  pitrnam  of 
fathers  ;  var  +  na  =  varna  m.  colour-,  us  +  na  =  usna  hot  ; 

^  g  in  cases  of  dis  and  dfs  :  dig-bhyas,  drg-bhis. 

^  But  in  the  nom.  vit  (vis),  vi-pat  (vi-pas)  and  spfit  spy  (spds)  the 
cerebral  lias  taken  the  place  of  the  phonetic  k  owing  to  the  influence 
of  other  forms  in  which  the  cerebral  is  phonetic. 

s  No  example  occurs  of  this  sound  before  the  su  of  the  loc.  plur. 


65] 


CEREBEALTZATION   OF  DENTAL   N 


43 


kramana  n,  step  (vowels  and  labial  nasal  intervene),  ark6na 
(guttural  and  vowel)  ;  grbhnati  seizes  (labial  mute) ;  brah- 
manya  devotion  (vowel,  h,  labial  nasal,  vowel ;  n  followed 
by  y).^ 

This  rule  is  followed  throughout  within  a  word  even  when 
a  s  which  it  contains  is  jDroduced  by  Sandhi;  e.g.  usuvanah. 
(for  u  suvanah). 

a.  The  ccrebi-alization  of  n  takes  place  almost  as  regularly  in  verbs 
compounded  with  the  prepositions  pra  lie/ore,  para  moan,  pari  round, 
nir  (for  nis)  out,  as  well  as  in  nominal  derivatives  of  these  combina- 
tions ;  e.g.  para-nude  {hxlA  thrust) , -pva-netv  guide  {■m  lead);  pari-hnuta 
denied  ;  praniti  breathes  (a/ an) ;  nir  hanyat  (ban  strike),  but  not  in  forms 
with  ghn  (e.  g.  abhi-pra-ghnanti) ;  pra  hinonii,  but  pari-hiu6mi 
(hi  impel). 

b.  In  nominal  compounds  n  is  usually  cerebralized  when  it  is  the 
initial  of  the  second  member  in  the  RV. ;  e.g.  dur-naman  ill-named, 
pra-napat  great-grandson  ;  but  tri-nak^  n.  third  heaven.  It  is  less  fre- 
quent medially  ;  e.  g.  piirvahna/o?*enoow,  vfsa-manas  manly-spirited,  but 
fsi-manas  of  far-seeing  mind  ;  nr-pana  giving  drink  to  men,  but  pari-pana 
n.  drink  (ep.  50  c  iS). 

t.  Cerebralization  is  even  extended  to  external  Sandhi  in  a  closely 
connected  fullowing  word,  most  often  initially  in  the  enclitic  nas  us, 
I'arely  in  other  monosyllables  such  as  mi  now,  na  like,  occasionally  in 
other  Avords  also  ;  ^  e.  g.  saho  sii  nah  ;  pdri  neta  .  .  .  visat.  It  some- 
times occurs  mediallj',  oftenest  in  the  enclitic  pronoun  ena  this  ;  e.  g. 
indra  enam.  It  occasionally  apj^ears  in  accented  words  also  after 
final  r  ;  e.  g.  gor  ohena. 

Table  showing  when  n  changes  to  n. 


r 
r 
r 

s 


in  spite  of  intervening  vowels, 
gutturals  (including  h), 
labials  (including  v), 
and  y 


change 
n 
to 
n 


if  followed 
by  vowels, 
n,  m,  y,  V. 


^  There  ai'e  two  exceptions  to  this  rule  in  the  RV.,  the  gen.  plur. 
ustranam  and  rastranam. 

^  After  the  final  cerebral  t  of  sdt  (for  sds  six),  assimilated  to  the 
following  n  (33),  initial  dental  n  is  cerebralized  in  san-navati  ninety-six 
(TS.)  and  in  san  niramimita  (B.). 


44  INTERNAL   CONSONANT  SANDHI  [6o 

66  A.  The  dental  n 

1.  remains  unchanged  before  y  and  v ;  e.  g.  han-yate  is 
slain ;  tan-v-ana  stretching/,  indhan-van  possessed  of  fuel 
(indhana),  asan-vant  having  a  mouth. 

2.  as  final  of  a  root  becomes  Anusvara  before  s ;  e.g.  ji- 
gham-sa-ti  wishes  to  hill  (V^han) ;  also  when  it  is  inserted 
before  final  s  or  s  in  the  neuter  plural  (71c;  83);  e.g. 
6nams-i  n.  pi.  of  6nas  sin  :  havims-i  n.  pi.  of  havis 
ohlation  (83). 

B.  The  dental  s 

1.  becomes  dental  t  as  the  final  of  roots  or  nominal 
stems 

a.  before  the  s  of  verbal  suffixes  (future,  aorist,  desiderative) 
in  the  three  verbs  vas  divell,  vas  shine,  and  ghas  eat :  thus 
a- vat-sis  thou,  hast  dwelt ;  vat-syati  ivill  shine  ;  ji-ghat-sati 
wishes  to  cat  (171,  5)  and  jighat-su  hungri/.^ 

h.  before  case-endings  with  initial  bh  in  the  reduplicated 
perf.  participle  and  in  four  other  words :  thus  jagrvad-bhis 
inst.  pi.  having  aivdkened ;  usad-bhis  from  usas  f.  dawn ; 
mad-bhis,  mad-bhyas  from  mas  m..month;  svatavad-bhyas 
from  sva-tavas  self-strong.  This  change  was  extended 
without  phonetic  justification "  to  the  nom.  ace.  s.  n.  in  the 
RV.,  as  tatau-vat  extending  far. 

2.  disappears 

a.  between  mutes ;  e.  g.  a-bhak-ta  3.  s.  s-  aor.,  for 
a-bhak-s-ta  beside  a-bhak-s-i,  of  bhaj  share ;  cas-te  for 
caks-te  (=  original  eas-s-te)  3.  s.  pres.  of  caks  speak; 
a-gdha  uneaten  for  a-ghs-ta  from  ghas  eat. 

A  similar  loss  occurs  in  verbal  compounds  formed  with 

1  The  change  of  s  to  t  before  the  t  of  the  3.  s.  of  a  past  tense,  as  in 
vy-avat  has  shone  forth  from  vi-vas,  is  probably  not  a  phonetic  change, 
but  is  rather  due  to  the  influence  of  the  3.  s.  of  other  pi-eterites  with  t ; 
*^-vas-t  having  thus  become  a-vat  instead  of  *dvas, 

2  There  having  been  no  case-ending  s  here.  No  example  occurs  in 
the  RV.  and  AV.  of  a  loc.  pi.  in  vat-su. 


66-67]  CEREBRALTZATION   OF   S  45 

the  i^reposition  ud  and  the  roots  stha  stand  and  stambh 
support ;  e.  g.  ut-thita  and  ilt-tabhita  raised  up. 

h.  before  dh  ;  e.  g.  sa-dhi  for  sas-dhi  2.  s,  impv.  of  sas 
order;  a-dhvam  2  pi.  mid.  impv.  of  as  sit;  also  after 
becoming  s  and  cerebralizing  the  following  dental ;  e.  g. 
a-sto-dhvam  (for  a-sto-s-dh.vam)  2.  pi.  aor.  of  stu  praise. 

67.  Change  of  dental  s  to  cerebral  s. 

A  preceding  vowel  except  a  (even  though  Anusvara^ 
intervenes)  as  well  as  k,  r,  s  change  dental  s  (followed  by 
a  vowel,  s,  t,  th,  n,  m,  y,  v)  to  cerebral  s  ;^  e.  g.  from  havis 
oblation:  havis-a  inst.  s.,  havims-i  nom.  pi.  ;  eaksus  n. 
eye:  caksus-a  inst.  s.,  caksiiins-i  nom.  pi.;  havis-su  loc. 
pi. ;  sraj  f.  wreath :  srak-sii  loc.  pi. ;  gir  f.  so)ig :  gir-su 
loc.  pi.  ;  ti-sthati  stands  from  stha  stand ;  caksus-mant 
possessing  eyes ;  bhavi-syati  xvill  be  from  bhli  he ;  su-svapa 
has  slept  from  svap  sleej).  But  sarpih  (final) ;  manaa-a 
(a  precedes) ;  us-ra  ^  matutinal. 

a.  The  cerebralizatiou  of  s  regularly  takes  place  in  the  RV.  initially 
in  verbal  compounds  after  prepositions  ending  in  1  and  u,  as  well  as  in 
nominal  derivatives  from  such  compound  verbs  ;  also  after  the  preposi- 
tion nis  out;  e.  g.  ni  sida  sil  down,  dnu  stuvanti  tliey  ■praise  ;  nih-sd.ha- 
manah  conquering.* 

b.  In  nominal  compounds,  s  is  more  usually  cerebralized  than  not, 
when  the  initial  s  of  the  second  member  is  preceded  by  vowels  other 
than  a  ;  e.  g.  su-s6ma  having  abundant  Soma.  But  s  is  often  retained  in 
the  RV.,  not  only  when  r  or  r  follows,  as  in  hrdi-spfs  touching  the  heart, 
rsi-svara  sung  by  seers,  but  also  when  there  is  no  such  cause  to  prevent 


1  The  s,  however,  remains  in  forms  of  hims  injure,  nims  kiss,  and 
pums  man,  probably  under  the  iufluence  of  the  strong  forms  hiuasti, 
pumamsam,  &c. 

2  Words  in  which  s  otherwise  follows  r  or  any  vowel  but  a  must  be 
of  foreign  origin,  as  bfsaya  a  demon,  bisa  n.  root  fibre,  bus^  n.  vapour. 

3  s  remains  when  immediately  followed  by  r  or  r,  o.  g.  tisrSs,  tisf- 
bhis,  tisfnam  f.  of  tri  three;  usras  gen.,  usri  and  usram  loc,  beside 
usar  voc.  dawn. 

*  The  s  remains  unchanged  when  followed  by  r  (even  when  t  in- 
tervenes) or  r  (even  though  a  intervenes,  with  additional  m  or  v  in 
smav  remember  aTid  svar  sound\. 


46 


INTERNAL   CONSONANT   SANDHI 


[67-69 


the  change  ;■  e.  g.  go-sakhi  beside  go-sakhi  possessbuj  cattle.     After  r  the 
s  becomes  s  in  svar-sa  light  winning,  svar-satl  f.  oUainment  of  light. 

c.  Cerebralization  is  even  extended  to  external  Sandhi  in  initial 
s  after  a  final  i  and  u  in  the  RV.  when  the  two  words  are  syntactically 
closely  connected.  This  change  chiefly  takes  place  in  monosyllabic 
pronouns  and  particles,  such  as  sa,  sya,  sim,  sma,  svid,  and  particu- 
lai-ly  su  ;  e.  g.  u  su.  It  also  occurs  in  numerous  verbal  forms  and 
participles  ;  e.g.  yuyam  M  stha /or  ye  are,  divi  siin  being  in  heaven.  In 
other  words  the  change  is  rare  ;  e.  g.  tri  .sadhdstha.^  In  the  later 
Samhitas  this  form  of  external  Sandhi  is  very  rare  except  in  the 
combination  u  sii. 

Table  showing  when  s  changes  to  s. 


Vowels  except  a 
(in  spite  of  inter- 
vening Anusvara), 
k,  r,  s 


change 

s 

to 

s 


if  followed 
by  vowels, 
t,  th,  n, 
m,  y,  V. 


68.  The  labial  m  remains  unchanged  before  y,  r,  1  (cp, 
60  and  42  B  1) ;  e,  g.  yam-yamana  being  guided,  vam-ra  m. 
ant,  apa-mlukta  concealed.  But  before  suffixes  beginning 
with  V  it  becomes  n;  e.g.  jagan-van  having  gone  (from 
gam  go). 

69.  a.  The  breathing  h  becomes  k  in  all  roots  before  s  ; 
e.  g.  dhak-si  2.  s.  pros,  from  dah  hum ;  sak-si  2.  s.  pres. 
from  saJa  prevail.  . 

h.  In  roots  beginning  with  d  it  is  treated  like  gh  before 
t,  th,  dh  ;  e.  g.  dah  +  ta  =  dag-dha  burnt  (62  b),  dnh  +  tam 
=  dug-dham  3.  du.  pres.  Similarly  treated  is  the  oldest 
form  of  the  perf.  pass,  participle  of  the  root  muh :  miig-dha 
beivildered. 

c.  h  in  all  other  roots  is  treated  like  an  aspirate  cerebral, 
which   after   changing   a   following   t,   th,   dh  to  dh    and 


1  In  tlie  EV.  occurs  the  Sandhi  y^juh  skanndm  (for  skanndm)  with- 
out cerebralization  of  the  nn  (cp.  65). 


69-70]  DECLENSION  47 

lengthening  a  preceding  short  vowel,  is  dropped  ;  e.  g. 
sah  +  ta  =  sa-dha  '  overcome  ;  rih  +  ta  =  ri-dha  liclced  ; 
muh  +  ta  =  mu-dha  (AV.)  hetvildered  ;  vah  +  ta  =  u-dha  ;" 
vah  +  dhvam  =  vo-dhvam  (VS.).^ 

d.  An  exception  to  c  is  the  root  nah  hind,  in  which  h  is 
treated  as  dh  :  nad-dha  hound.  An  exception  to  both  h 
and  c  is  the  root  drh  :  dr-dha  firm  (begins  with  d  and  has 
a  short  vowel). ^ 


CHAPTER   III 
DECLENSION 

70.  Declension,  or  the  inflexion  of  nominal  stems  by 
means  of  endings  that  express  the  various  syntactical  rela- 
tions represented  by  the  cases,  is  most  conveniently  treated, 
owing  to  characteristic  difference  of  form,  meaning,  and  use, 
under  (1)  nouns  (including  adjectives) ;  (2)  numerals;  (3)  pro- 
nouns. 

In  Vedic  there  are 

a.  three  genders :  masculine,  feminine,  and  neuter  ; 

h.  three  numbers :  singular,  dual,  and  plural  ; 

c.  eight  cases  :  nominative,  vocative,  accusative,  instru- 
mental, dative,  ablative,  genitive,  locative.^ 

1  In  all  these  past  participles  the  dh  is  in  the  RV.  written  as  Ih. 

^  With  Samprasarana. 

^  Through  vazh-dhvam :  azh  here  becoming  o  just  as  original  as 
(through  az)  becomes  o  (cp.  45  b). 

*  Before  this  dh  the  vowel  r  never  appears  lengthened,  but  it  is 
prosodically  long  (cp.  8,  note  2). 

^  This  is  the  order  of  the  eases  in  the  Hindu  Sanskrit  grammarians, 
excepting  the  vocative,  which  is  not  regarded  by  them  as  a  case.  It 
is  convenient  as  the  only  arrangement  by  which  such  cases  as  are 
identical  in  form,  either  in  the  singular,  the  dual,  or  the  plural,  may 
be  grouped  together. 


48  DECLENSION  [71-72 

71.  The  normal  case-endings  added  to  the  stem  are  the 
following : — 

Singular.  Dual.  Plural. 

m.  f.  n.  m.  f.  n.  m.  p.  n. 

N.  S  — 1'      )  ) 

V.     — ^  —      I     au  i      I     as  ic 

A.     am  —      j  j 

I.  a  )  . 

D.  e  bhyam         I        b^Lis 

Ab.l  __  I  '       bhyas 

am 


L*  i 


OS 

su 


a.  The  vocative  is  the  same  (apart  from  the  accent)  as 
the  nominative  in  all  numbers  except  the  masc.  and  fern, 
sing,  of  vowel  stems  generally  and  the  masc.  sing,  of  con- 
sonant stems  in  -an,  -man,  -van ;  -mant,  -vant ;  -in ;  -as ; 
-yams,  -vams ;  -tar. 

h.  The  noni.  ace.  sing,  has  the  bare  stem  excepting  the 
words  in  -a,  which  add  m. 

c.  The  nom.  voc.  ace.  plur.  neut.  before  the  ending  i 
insert  n  after  a  vowel  stem  and  before  a  single  final  mute 
or  sibilant  of  a  consonant  stem  (modifying  the  n  according 
to  the  character  of  the  consonant :  op.  66  A  2). 

72.  An  important  distinction  in  declension  is  that  between 
the  strong  and  the  weak  stem.  It  is  fully  developed  only 
in  derivative  consonant  stems  formed  with  the  suffixes  -anc, 
-an,  -man,  -van  ;  -ant,  -mant,  -vant ;  -tar  ;  -yams,  -vams. 
In  the  first  four  and  in  the  last  the  weak  stem  is  further 
reduced  before  vowel  endings.  The  stem  here  has  three 
forms,  which  may  be  distinguished  as  strong,  middle,  and 
weakest. 

a.  Shift  of  accent  was  the  cause  of  the  distinction.  The 
stem,  having  been  accented  in  the  strong  cases,  here  naturally 
preserved  its  full  form ;  but  it  was  shortened  in  the  weak 
cases  by  the  accent  falling  on  the  endings.  For  a  similar 
reason  the  last  vowel  of  the  strong  stem,  if  long,  is  regularly 


of  masc.  nouns. ^ 


72-74]  DECLENSION  49 

shortened  in  the  vocative,  because  the  accent  always  shifts 
to  the  first  syllable  in  that  case. 

73.  The  strong  stem  appears  in  the  following  cases : 

Nom.  voc.  ace.  sing. 

Nom.  voc.  ace.  dual 

Nom.  voc.  (not  ace.)  plur. 

Nom  voc.  ace.  plural  only  of  neuters. 

a.  When  the  stem  has  three  forms,  the  middle  stem 
appears  before  terminations  beginning  with  a  consonant^ 
(bhyam,  bhis,  bhyas,  su) ;  the  weakest  before  terminations 
beginning  with  a  vowel  in  the  remaining  weak  cases ; 
e.  g.  pratyanc-au  nom.  du.  ;  pratyag-bhis  inst.  pi.  ; 
pratic-6s  gen.  du.  (93). 

h.  In  neuters  with  three  stems,  the  nom.  voc.  ace.  sing, 
are  middle,  the  nom.  voc.  ace.  du.  weakest ;  e.  g.  pratyak 
sing.  ;  pratic-i  du.  ;  pratyanc-i  pi.  (93).  The  other  cases 
are  as  in  the  masc. 

NOUNS. 

74.  Nominal  stems  are,  owing  to  divergences  of  inflexion, 
best  classified  under  the  main  divisions  of  consonant  and 
vowel  declension. 

I.  Stems  ending  in  consonants  ^  may  be  subdivided  into 

A.  unchangeable  ;  B.  changeable. 

II.  Stems  ending  in  vowels  into  those  in  A.  a  and  a  ;  B.  i 

and  u;  C.  i  and  u. 

'  Excepting  names  of  relationship  in  -tar  (101),  nearly  all  nouns 
with  changeable  stems  form  their  feminine  with  the  suffix  -i  (100). 

2  Changeable  stems  are  named  in  this  grammar  in  their  strong  and 
original  form,  though  the  middle  form  would  be  more  practical,  inas- 
much as  that  is  the  form  in  which  changeable  stems  ajjpear  as  prior 
member  in  compounds. 

^  Some  Sanskrit  grammars  begin  with  the  vowel  declension  in  a 
(11.  A)  since  this  contains  the  majority  of  all  the  declined  stems  in 
the  language.  But  it  appears  preferable  to  begin  with  the  consonant 
decleiTsion  which  adds  the  normal  endings  (71)  without  modification. 

181Q  E 


50 


DECLENSION 


[75-77 


I,     A.     Unchangeable  Stems. 

75.  These  stems  are  for  the  most  part  primary  or  radical, 
but  also  include  some  secondary  or  derivative  words.  They 
end  in  consonants  of  all  classes  except  gutturals  (these  having 
always  become  palatals,  which  however  revert  to  the  original 
sound  in  certain  cases).  They  are  liable  to  such  changes  only 
as  are  i-equired  by  the  rules  of  Sandhi  before  the  consonant 
terminations  (cp.  16  a).  Masculines  and  feminines  ending 
in  the  same  consonant  are  inflected  exactly  alike ;  and  the 
neuters  differ  only  in  the  ace.  s.  and  nom.  voc.  ace.  du.  and  pi. 

76.  The  final  consonants  of  the  stem  retain  their  original 
sound  before  vowel  terminations  (71)  ;  but  when  there  is  no 
ending  (i.e.  in  the  nom.  sing.,  in  which  the  s  of  the  m.  and 
f.  is  dropped),  and  before  the  ending  su  of  the  loc.  pi.,  they 
must  be  reduced  to  one  of  the  letters  k,  t,  t,  p  or  Visarjanlya 
(27)  which  respectively  become  g,  d,  d,  b  or  r  before  the 
terminations  beginning  with  bh. 

a.  The  voc.  sing.  m.  f.  is  the  same  as  the  nom.  except  in 
stems  in  (derivative)  as  (83). 

h.  Forms  of  the  nom.  voc.  ace.  pi.  n.  seem  not  to  occur 
in  the  Samhitas '  except  in  the  dez'ivative  as,  is,  us  stems 
where  they  are  common  ;  e.g.  apamsi,  arcimsi,  caksumsi. 

Stems  in  Dentals. 

77.  Paradigm  tri-vrt  m.  f.  n.  threefold. 

Sing.  Dual.  Plur. 

N.  m.  f.  trivrt  n.  trivrt      N.A.)  ftrivrt-a,  N.  m.  f.   trivrt-ai^ 

A.  m.  f.  trivrt-am    n.  trivrt      m.f.  )  (trivrt-au  A.  m.  f.    triv^t-as 
I.                         trivrt-a            I.     ]  ' 

G.  [trivrt-os]     G.  trivrt-a 

L.  trivrt-os       L.  trivrt-s 

m.  f.  V.    trivrt-a 

^  But  in  the  Bi-ahmanas  are  found  from  -bhrt  bearing,  -vrt  turning, 
-hu-t  sacrificing  the  N.  pi.  n.  forms  -bhrnti,  -vrnti,  -hunti. 


D. 

Ab.  G. 
L. 


trivrt-e 

trivrt-as 

trivft-i 


77]  STEMS   IN   DENTALS  51 

1.  Of  the  stems  in  t  most  are  radica],  nearl)'  thirty  of 
them  being  formed  with  a  determinative  t  added  to  roots 
ending  in  the  short  vowels  i,  u,  r;  e.g.  ji-t  conquering, 
srii-t  hearing,  ki'-t  mahing.  Nearly  all  of  them,  however, 
appear  as  the  last  member  of  compounds,  except  cit  f.  thought ; 
dyu-t  f.  brilliance ;  nrt  f.  dancing  ;  vr-t  f.  7^05^.  From  sarva- 
hu-t  offering  cornpletehj  occurs  in  N.  pi.  n.  the  form  sarva- 
hunti  in  the  AB.  There  are  also  a  few  derivative  stems 
formed  with  the  suffixes  -vat,  -tat,  -it,  -ut,  and  secondary 
-t;  e.g.  pra-vat  f.  height,  deva-tat  f.  divine  service-,  sar-it 
f.  stream  ;  mar-vit  m.  storm-god ;  yakr-t  n.  liver,  sakr-t  n. 
excrement. 

2.  There  are  only  three  stems  in  th  :  kaprth,  n.  penis, 
path  m.  path,  abhi-snath  adj.  piercing. 

3.  a.  About  100  stems  end  in  radical  d,  all  but  a  few 
being  roots  used  as  the  final  member  of  compounds  ;  e.  g. 
nom.  adri-bhid  mountain-cleaving.  Only  eight  occur  as 
monosyllabic  substantives  :  nid  f.  contempt,  bhid  f.  destroyer, 
vid  f.  knowledge,  ud  f.  u-ave,  mud  f.  jog,  mrd  f.  dag,  hrd  n. 
heart  (used  in  weak  eases  only) ;  and  pad  m.  foot.  The 
latter  lengthens  its  vowel  in  the  strong  cases : 

Sing.  N.  pat.     A.  pad-am.     I.  pad-a.     D.  pad-6.      Ab.G. 

pad-as.      L.  pad-i. 
Du.  N.A.  pad-a.     I.  Ab.  pad-bhyam.       G.L.  pad-6s. 
PL  N,  pad-as.      A.  pad-as.     I.  pad-bhis.     D.  pad-bhyas. 

G.  pad-am.     L.  pat-su. 

h.  There  are  also  six  stems  formed  with  derivative  d 
(suffixal  -ad  -ud), seemingly  all  feminine:  drs-adand  dhrs-ad 
nether  millstone,  bhas-ad  hind  quarters,  van-ad  longing,  sar-ad 
autumn,  kak-iid  summit,  kak-ud  palate. 

4.  There  are  about  fifty  radical  stems  in  dh,  simple  or 
compound.  They  are  almost  restricted  to  m.  and  f.,  no 
distinctively  n.  forms  (N.  A.  du.  pi.)  occurring  and  only  four 
forms  being  used  as  n.  in  the  G.  L.  s.     Seven  stems  appear 

e2 


52  DECLENSION  [77-78 

as  monosyllabic  nouns  :  vrdh  strengthening  as  a  masc.  adj ., 
the  rest  as  fern,  substantives :  nadh  bond  ;  sridh  foe ;  ksiidh 
Jmnger ;  yiidh  fight ;  mrdh  conflict ;  vrdh  prosperity  ;  sprdh 
hattle. 

5.  Eadical  stems  in  n  are  formed  from  half  a  dozen  roots. 
Four  of  these  are  monosyllabic  substantives :  tan  f.  succession  ; 
ran  m.  jog  ;  van  m.  wood  ;  svan  adj.  sounding.^  There  are 
also  the  compound  adjectives  tuvi-svan  roaring  cdoud  and 
go-san  ivinning  coivs.  Han  staging  occurs  as  the  final 
member  of  at  least  thirty-five  compounds,  but  as  it  follows 
for  the  most  part  the  analogy  of  the  an  stems,  it  will  be 
treated  under  these  (92). 

Stems  in  Labials. 

78.  These  stems,  which  end  in  p,  bh,  and  m  only,  are  not 
numerous.  No  neuters  occur  in  the  first  two  and  only  one 
or  two  in  the  last. 

1.  All  the  monosyllabic  stems  in  p  are  fem.  substantives. 
They  are:  ap  ivater,  krp  heautg,  ksap  night,  ksip  finger, 
rip  deceit,  riip  earth,  vip  rod.  There  are  also  about  a  dozen 
compounds,  all  adjectives  except  vi-stap  f.  summit.  Three 
of  the  adjectives  occur  as  f.,  the  rest  as  m. ;  e.  g.  pasu-trp 
m.  delighting  in  cattle. 

a.  ap  lengthens  the  stem  in  the  N.V.  pi.  ap-as,  a  form 
sometimes  used  for  the  A.  also.  The  forms  occurring  are : 
Sing.  I.  ap-a.  Ab.G.  ap-as.  Du.N.  ap-a.  Pl.N.V.  ap-as.  A. 
ap-as.    I.  ad-bhis.   D.Ab.  ad-bhyas.   G.  ap-am,   L.  ap-sii. 

2.  The  six  uncompounded  stems  in  bh  are  all  f.  substan- 
tives :  ksubh  push,  grbh  seising,  nabh  destroyer,  subh 
splendour,  stubh  ^;ra/se  (also  adj.  praising),  and  kakilbh^eaA;. 
There  ai'e  also  more  than  a  dozen  compounds :  the  substan- 
tives are  all  f.,  the  rest  being  m.  or  f.  adjectives  ;  there  are 


^  The  accent  of  these  stems  is  irregular  in  remaining  on  the  radical 
syllable  (App.  III.  11,  1),  except  tana  (beside  tana)  and  vanam. 


78-79]  STEMS   IN   PALATALS  53 

no  neuters.  The  cases  of  tri-stubh  f.  triple  praise  (a  metre) 
are :  Sing.  N.  tristup.  A.  tristiibh-am.  I.  tristiibh-a.  D. 
tristiibh-e.       Ab.    ti'istiibh-as.       L.    tristubh-i ;    PI.    A. 

•   ■  •   •  •  •  7 

tristubh-as. 

a.  nabh  lengthens  its  vowel  in  the  N.  pi.  nabh-as. 
A.  nabh-as. 

3.  There  are  five  or  six  monosyllabic  stems  in  m,  and 
one  compound :  sam  n.  happiness,  dam  n.  (?)  house,  ksam, 
gam,  jam  f.  earth,  him  m.  (?)  cold ;  sam-nam  f.  favour. 

a.  Gam  and  jam  syncopate  in  the  s.  LAb.G. :  gm-a,  jm-a  ; 
gm-as,  jm-as ;  ksam  syncopates  in  the  Ab.  G.  s.  and 
lengthens  its  vowel  in  N.  du.pl. :  ksm-as;  ksam-a;  ksam-as. 
Dam  has  the  G.  s.  dan  (for  dam-s)  in  the  expressions  patir 
dan  and  pati  dan  =  dam-patis  and  dam-pati  lord  of  the 
house  and  lord  and  lady  of  the  house. 

Stems  in  Palatals. 

79.  The  palatals  (c,  j,  s)  undergo  a  change  of  organ  when 
final  and  before  consonant  terminations  (cp.  63).  c  always 
becomes  guttural  (k  or  g),  j  and  s  nearly  always  become 
guttural,  but  sometimes  cerebral  (t  or  d). 

1.  The  unchangeable  stems  in  c  '  when  uncompounded 
are  monosyllabic  and  almost  exclusively  f.  substantives. 
Tvac  s¥m,  however,  twice  occurs  as  a  m.,  and  krunc  curlew 
is  m.  Compounds,  as  adjectives,  are  often  m.,  but  only  one 
form  occurs  as  a  n.,  in  the  adv.  a-prk  in  a  mixed  manner. 
Vac  speech  would  be  declined  as  follows : 

Sing.  N.V.  vak.       A.    vac-am    (Lat.    voc-em).       I.    vac-a. 

D.  vac-6.     Ab.G.  vac-as.     L.  vac-i. 
Dual.  N.A.V.  vac-a,  vac-au.     I.  vag-bhyam. 
Plur.  N.  V.  vac-as.     A.  vac-as  (rarely  vac-as).    I.  vag-bhis. 

D.Ab.  vag-bhyas.     G.  vac-am. 

^  Stems  in  derivative  anc  are  changeable  (93). 


54  DECLENSION  [79 

Similarly  declined  are  : — tvac  slcin^ ;  sic  hem ;  rue  lustre, 
sue  flame,  srue  ladle ;  re  stanza,  mrc  injur); ;  ni-mriic 
sunset  and  other  compounds.  Krunc  forms  its  N.  s.  krun, 
du.  kruucau. 

2.  There  is  only  one  stem  in  eh,  formed  from  the  root 
prch  asJc :  N.  du.  m.  bandhu-preh-a  ashing  after  kinsmen ; 
also  the  D.  and  A.  infinitive  foi'ms  prch-e  to  asl;  sam-preh-e 
to  greet ;  vi-preh-am  and  sam-prch-am  to  ask. 

3.  a.  Uncompounded  radical  stems  in  j  are  mostly  f. 
substantives  ;  but  aj  driver,  vij  stake  at  play  are  m.,  and 
yiii,'^  raj,  bhraj  are  m.  as  well  as  f.  Neut.  forms  occur  in 
compound  adjectives,  but  never  the  distinctively  n.  endings 
of  the  N.A.V.  du.  and  pi.'' 

When  the  j  is  derived  from  a  guttural,  it  becomes  a 
guttural  in  the  N.  s.  and  before  consonant  endings  ;  when 
derived  from  an  old  palatal,  it  becomes  a  cerebral  in  the 
N.  s.^  and  before  consonants,  but  k  before  the  su  of 
the  L.  pi. 

Thus  in  the  N.  urk  (urj)  vigour ;  nir-nik  (nir-nij)  bright 
garment ;  but  bhrat  m.  shining  (bhraj),  rat  m,  king,  f. 
mistress ;  L.  pi.  srak-su  garlands  (sraj),  pra-yak-su  offerings 
(pra-yaj). 

a.  Tlie  N.  of  ava-yaj  f.  share  of  the  sacrificial  oblation  and  of  avayaj  m. 
priest  who  offers  the  oblation  is  anomalous  in  dropping  the  j  and  adding 
the  s  of  the  nom.  :  ava-yas,  avayas  (cp.  28  a  . 

h.  There  are  seven  m.  and  f.  adj.  or  subst.  formed  with 
the  suffixes  -aj  and  -ij :    a-svapn-aj  sleepless,  trsn-aj  thirstij, 

^  From  vyac  extend  occurs  the  strong  form  uru-vyancam/ar  extend- 
iwj,  and  from  sac  accompany  only  the  strong  forms  A.  -sac-am,  and  N.  pi. 
-sae-as. 

2  This  word  meaning  companion  also  has  a  nasalized  form  in 
N.A.  s.  du.  :  yiin  (for  yunk),  yuiaj-am,  yiinj-a. 

2  But  in  a  Brahmana  -bhaj  sharing  forms  the  N.  pi.  n.  form  -bhanji. 

*  Except  in  rtv-ik  from  rtu-ij  m.  sacrificing  in  due  season,  priest  (from 
yaj  sacrifice). 


79]  STEMS  TN  PALATALS   AND   S  55 

dhrs-aj  hold,  san-aj  old  ;  us-ij  desiring,  bhur-ij  f.  ann,  van-ij 
m.  trader.     There  is  also  the  n.  asrj '  blood. 

usij  m.f.  would  be  declined  as  follows : 

Sing.    N.    usik.       A.    usij-am.        I.    usij-a.        D.    usij-e. 

G.  usij -as. 
Du.N.  usij-a.     G.L.  usij-os. 
PI.N.  usij-as.      A.  usij-as.     I.  usig-bhis.      D.  usig-bhyas. 

G.  usij-am. 

4.  There  are  about  sixty  monosyllabic  and  compound 
stems  in  s  formed  from  about  a  dozen  roots.  Nine  mono- 
syllabic stems  are  f.  :  das  worship,  dis  direction,  drs  look, 
nas  nigJit,  pas  sight,  pis  ornament,  pras  dispute,  vis  settlement, 
vris  finger.  Two  are  m.  :  is  lord  and  spas  spg.  All  the 
rest  are  compounds  (about  twenty  of  them  formed  from 
-drs).  Some  half-dozen  cases  of  the  latter  are  used  as 
neuter,  but  no  distinctively  n.  forms  (N.A.  du.  pi.)  occur. 

The  s,  as  it  represents  an  old  palatal,  normally  becomes 
cerebral  d  before  bh,  but  in  dis  and  drs  a  guttural.  Before 
the  su  of  the  L.  pi.  it  phonetically  and  regularly  becomes  k. 
It  usually  also  becomes  k  in  the  N.  s.  (which  originally 
ended  in  s),  as  dik,  nak ;  but  cerebral  t  in  spas  and  vi-spas 
spij,  vis  and  vi-pas  a  river. 

The  normal  forms,  if  made  from  vis  settlement,  would  be : 
N.V.  vit.     A.  vis-am.     I.  vis-a.     D.  vis-6.     Ab.G.  vis-as. 

L.  vis-i. 
Du.  N.A.  vis-a,  vis-au. 

PI.  N.A.  vis-as.     I  vid-bhis.     D.  vid-bhyas.     G.  vis-am. 
L.  vik-su. 

a.  The  N.  of  some  compounds  of  dra  is  nasalized,  as  ki-dfn  (for 
ki-dfnk)  of  what  kind?,  but  ta-dfk  suck. 

The  N.  s  irregularly  represents  the  final  palatal  (28  a)  in  purodas 
m.  sacrificial  cake  :  N.  purodas,  A.  purodasam. 

1  This  word  is  of  obscure  origin,  but  the  j  probably  represents  a 
reduced  suffix. 


56  DECLENSION  [80-81 

Stems  in  Cerebrals. 

80.  The  only  cerebral  stems  that  occur  end  in  d  and  s. 
Of  the  former  there  are  only  two  :  id  f.  praise  (only  found 
in  s.  I.  id-a)  and  id  f.  refreshment  (only  in  s.  I.  id-a  and 
G.  id-as). 

There  are  a  number  of  stems  from  about  a  dozen  roots 
ending  in  s  preceded  by  i,  u,  r,  or  k.  Seven  of  these  are 
uncompounded :  is  f.  refreshment,  tvis  f.  excitement,  dvis  f. 
hatred,  ris  f.  injury ;  us  f.  dawn ;  prks  f.  satiation  ;  dadhrs 
hold.  The  rest  are  compounds  of  the  above  or  of  mis  ivinh, 
sris  lean,  uks  sprinJcle,  mus  steal,  prus  drip,  dhrs  dare, 
vrs  rain  ;  aks  em.  The  s  becomes  t  in  the  N.,  and  d  before 
bh,  but  is  of  course  dropped  when  k  precedes  ;  e.  g.  N.  dvit, 
vi-priit  f.  drop,  an-ak  eyeless,  Uind ;  I.  pi.  vi-prud-bhis. 

o.  The  final  becomes  k  in  the  adverbial  neuter  form  dadhrk  boldly. 

Stems  in  h. 

81.  There  are  some  eighty  stems  formed  from  about 
a  dozen  roots.  All  three  genders  are  found  in  their  inflexion, 
but  the  neuter  is  rare,  occurring  in  two  stems  only,  and 
never  in  the  plural.  Of  monosyllabic  stems  nih  destroyer, 
mih  mist,  giih  hiding-place,  riih  sprout  are  f.,.  druh  fiend  is  m. 
or  f.,  sah  conqueror  is  m.,  mah  (jreat,  m.  and  n.  All  the 
rest  are  compounds,  more  than  fifty  being  formed  from  the 
three  roots  druh  hate,  vah  carry,  sah  overcome ;  over  thirty 
of  them  from  the  last.'  The  two  stems  usnih  f.  a  metre, 
and  sarah  hec  are  obscure  in  origin. 

a.  As  h  represents  both  the  old  guttural  gh  and  the  old 
palatal  jh  it  should  phonetically  become  g  or  d  before  bh, 
but  the  cerebral  represents  both  in  the  only  two  forms  that 
occur  with  a  bh  ending.      In  the  only  L.  pi.  that  occurs, 

^  upa-ndh  f.  shoe  occurs  only  in  the  L.  s.  upa-nah-i.  Judging  by 
the  inflexion  of  the  word  in  classical  Sanskrit  the  h  would  become  a 
dental  in  the  N.  s.  and  before  consonant  endings. 


81-82]  STEMS   IN   H   AND   R  57 

anadiit-su  (from  anad-vah),  the  h  imphonetically  became  t, 
which  has  been  dissimilated  to  t.  In  the  N.  the  phonetic  k 
aj^peai's  in  the  six  forms  -dhak,  -dhuk,  -dhruk,  -I'uk, 
-sprk,  usnik,  and  the  unphonetic  t  in  the  three  forms  -vat, 

Sat)*    S^P^La 

•  •  7  a 

h.  Stems  formed  from  vah  ^  and  sah  lengthen  the  radical 
vowel  in  the  strong  cases,  the  former  always,  the  latter 
generally. 

The  forms  actually  occurring  if  made  from  sah  victorious 
would  be : 

Sing.  N.V.  m.  f.  sat.-    A.  m.  f.  sah-am.    I.  sah-a.    D.  sah-6. 

Ab.G.  sah-as.     L.  sah-i. 
Du.  N.A.V.  m.  f.  sah-a  and  sah-au.     N.A.  n.  sah-i. 
PI.    N.A.V.   m.    f.    sah-as.      A.  m.    sah-as    and    sah-as ; 

f.   sah-as.      D.    sad-bhyas.      G.   m.    sah-am.      L.  m. 

sat-sii. 

Stems  in  r.'^ 

82.  There  are  over  fifty  stems  in  radical  r.^  The  preceding 
vowel  is  nearly  always  i  or  u,  only  two  stems  containing 
a  and  three  a.  Twelve  stems  are  monosyllabic  (seven  f.,^ 
three  m.,"  two  n.^),  the  rest  being  compounds.  The  r 
remains  before  the  su  of  the  L.  pi.,  and  the  radical  vowel 

^  anad-vdh  being  a  changeable  stem  with  three  forms  is  ti-eated 
under  the  irregular  changeable  stems  (96). 

^  When  h  becomes  t  the  initial  s  is  cerebralized. 

3  There  are  no  stems  in  1 ;  while  the  five  which  may  be  regarded 
as  ending  in  the  semivowels  y  or  v  are  treated  below  (102)  as  ai,  o, 
or  au  stems. 

*  The  stems  in  which  the  r  is  derivative  (and  preceded  by  a),  in 
the  suffixes  -ar  and  -tar,  are  treated  below  (101)  as  r  stems. 

^  gir  praise,  dvar  door,  dhiir  burden,  piir  stronghold,  t^r  star,  psiir 
victuals,  st^r  star. 

^  gir  praising,  var  protector,  miir  destroyer. 

^  var  loater,  svar  light. 


58  DECLENSION  [82-83 

is  lengthened  in  the  N.  s.  and  before  consonant  endings. 
The  forms  occurring,  if  made  from  pur,  would  be  : 

Sing.  N.  pur.      A.  pur-am.       D.  pur-6.      Ab.G.  pur-as. 

L.  pur-i. 
Du.  N.A.  pur-a,  pur-au. 
PI.  N.V.  pur-as.    A.  pur-as.    I.  pur-bhis.    D.  pur-bhyas. 

G.  pur-am.     L.  pur-su. 

a.  dvar  has  the  weakened  A.  pi.  form  duras  (also  once  duras  and 
once  dvaras),  the  only  weak  case  occuri-ing. 

b.  tdr  occurs  in  one  (strong)  form  only,  N.  pi.  tar-as,  and  star  in 
one  (weak)  form  only,  I.  pi.  stfbhis.^ 

c.  svar  n.  light  has  the  two  contracted  forms  D.  sur-6,  6.  sur-as.'^ 
It  drops  the  case-ending  in  the  L.  s.^  siiar. 

Stems  in  s. 

83.  1.  The  radical  s  stems  number  about  forty.  A  dozen 
are  monosyllabic,  five  being  m. :  jnas  relative,  mas  month, 
vas^  abode,  pums  niale,^  sas  ruler  ;  two  f. :  kas  cough,  nas 
nose ;  five  n. :  as  face,  bhas  light,  mas  flesh,  dos  arm,  yos 
tvelfare.  The  rest  are  compounds,  e.g.  su-das  giving  tvell, 
liberal. 

a.  Before  bh  the  s  becomes  d  in  the  two  forms  I.  mad-bhis  and  D. 
mad-bhyas,  and  r  in  the  only  other  one  that  occurs  :  dor-bhyam. 

h.  The  A.  pi.  has  the  accentuation  of  weak  cases  in  mas-as  and 
jnas-as. 

2.  The  derivative  stems  in  s  are  formed  with  the  suffixes 
-as,  -is,  -us,  and  are,  with  few  exceptions,  neuter  substan- 
tives. All  of  them  lengthen  their  final  vowel  in  the  N.V. A. 
pi.  n.,  e.g.  manamsi,  jy6timsi,  caksumsi.  The  m.  and  f. 
are  mostly  compounds  with  these  stems  as  their  final 
member. 

a.  The  as  stems  consist  almost  entirely  of  neuters,  which 

^  With  irregular  accent.  -  With  the  accent  of  a  disyllabic. 

3  Like  the  an  stems  (90,  2).  *  This  word  might  be  a  feminine. 

^  This  woixl  will  be  treated  later  (96,  3)  as  an  irregular  changeable 
stem. 


83]  STEMS   IN  AS  59 

are  accented  on  the  root,  as  man-as  mind,  but  these  as  final 
members  of  adjective  compounds  may  be  inflected  in  all 
three  genders.  There  are  also  a  few  primary  masculines, 
which  ai-e  accented  on  the  suffix,  being  either  substantives, 
as  raks-as  m.  demon,  or  adjectives  (some  of  which  occur  also 
in  the  f.  as  well  as  n.),  as  ap-as  active ;  and  one  primary  f., 
us-as  dmvn. 

The  N.  s.  m.  f.  lengthens  the  vowel  of  the  suffix :  e.  g. 
angiras  m.,  usas'  f.,  su-manas  m.  f.  In  about  a  dozen 
compounds  the  long  vowel  appears  (owing  to  the  influence 
of  the  m.)  in  the  n.  also  ;  e.  g.  urna-mradas  soft  as  ivool. 

Before  endings  with  initial  bh  the  suffix  as  becomes  o 
(45  h).  The  forms  actually  occurring,  if  made  from  ap-as, 
n.  (Lat.  opus)  worJc  and  ap-as  m.  f,  aetive  would  be  as  follows : 

Sing.  N.  apas ;  apas.       A.  apas ;   apas-am.      I.  apas-a ; 

apas-a.     D.  apas-e ;    apas-e.     Ab.  apas-as ;  apas-as. 

L.  apas-i ;  apas-i.     V.  apas. 
Du.    N.A.V.   apas-i ;  apas-a,  apas-au.-      D.    apo-bhyam. 

G.  apas- OS. 
PI.  apams-i;    apas-as.     I.  apo-bhis;  apo-bhis.     D.  apo- 

bhyas  ;    apo-bhyas.        G.  apas-am  ;    apas-am.       L. 

apas-su;  apas-su. 

Similarly  N.  n.  yasas  glory,  m.  f.  yasas  glorious ;  f. 
apsaras  nymph. 

a.  A  number  of  forms  have  the  appearance  of  being  contractions 
in  the  A.  s.  and  N.A.  pi.  m.  f.  :  am  =  asam  and  as  =  asas  ;  thus 
maham  great,  vedham  ordaincr,  usam  dawn,  jaram  old  age,  medham 
wisdom,  vayam  vigour,  an-agam  sinless,  apsaram.  PI.  N.  ni.  angiras, 
an-agas,  na-vedas  cognisant,  sa-j6sas  united;  f.  medhas,  a-josas  insati- 
able, na-vedas,  su-radhas  bountiful.  A.  m.  au-agas,  su-medhas  (?) 
intelligent;  f.  usas. 


1  The  vowel  of  tliis  word  is  optionally  lengthened  in  the  A.  s., 
N.  A.  du.,  N.  V.  pi.  :  usas-am  beside  usas-ara,  &c. 

^  The  ending  au  is  here  very  rare  and  occurs  chiefly  in  the  later 
Samhitas. 


60  DECLENSION         '  [83 

h.  The  is  stems,  numbering  about  a  dozen,  consist 
primarily  of  neuters  only.  When  they  form  final  members 
of  compounds,  they  are  secondarily  inflected  as  m.  ;  only 
one  single  such  form,  N.  s.  sva-soeis  self-radiant,  occurs 
as  a  f. 

The  final  s  becomes  s  before  vowel-endings  and  the 
L.  pi.  su,  and  r  before  bli.  The  inflexion  of  the  n.  differs 
from  that  of  the  m.  in  the  A.  s.,  N.A.  du.  and  pi.  The 
actual  forms  occurring,  if  made  from  socis  glow  in  the  n. 
and  from  -socis  m.  (when  it  differs  from  the  n.),  would 
be  : 

Sing.    N.    socis ;    A.    socis ;    m.    -socis-am.       I.    socis-a. 

D.  socis-e.     Ab.G.  socis-as.     L.  socis-i.     V.  socis. 
PI.  N.A.  socims-i,  m.  -socis-as.      I.  socir-bhis.      D.  socir- 

bhyas.     G.  socis-am.     L.  socis-su  (67). 

a.  asis  f.  praxjer,  which  is  not  really  an  is  stem,  being  derived  from 
a  +  sis  (the  reduced  form  of  the  root  sas\  is  inflected  thus:  N.  asis. 
A.  asis-am.     I.  asis-a.     PI.  N.  A.  asis-as. 

c.  The  US  stems,  numbering  at  least  sixteen  exclusive 
of  comjiounds,  comprise  several  primary  masculines  as  well 
as  neuters  ;  three  of  the  latter  when  compounded  are  also 
inflected  as  f.  Eleven  of  the  us  stems  are  n.  substantives, 
all  but  one  ( janiis  hirth)  accented  on  the  radical  syllable  ; 
four  of  these  (arus,  caksus,  tapus,  vapus)  are  also  used  as 
m.  adjectives.  Three  of  the  exclusively  m.  us  stems  are 
adjectives  accented  on  the  suffix,  while  two  (nahus,  manus) 
are  substantives  accented  on  the  root. 

The  final  s  becomes  s  before  vowel  endings,  and  r 
before  bh.  The  inflexion  of  the  n.  is  the  same  as  that  of 
the  m.  except  in  the  A.  s.  and  N.A.  du.  pi.  The  only 
f.  forms  (about  half  a  dozen)  occur  in  the  N.  and  A. : 
e.  g.  N.  caksus  seeing,  A.  du.  tapus-a  hot. 

The  actual  forms  occurring,  if  made  from  caksus  eye  as  n. 
and  seeing  as  m.  would  be  : 


83-85]  CHANGEABLE   STEMS  61 

Sing.  N.  caksus.     A.  caksus ;  m.  caksus-am.     I.  caksus-a. 

D.  caksus-e.     Ab.G.  caksus-as.     L.  caksus-i. 
Du.  N. A.  caksus-i ;  m.  caksus-a.     D.   caksur-bhyana. 
PI.    N.A.    caksums-i ;     m.    caksus-as.      I.    caksur-bhis. 

D.  caksur-bhyas.     G.  caksus-am. 


I.    B.    Changeable  Stems. 

84.  Kegular  changeable  stems  are  found  only  among 
derivative  nouns  formed  with  suffixes  ending  in  the  dentals 
t,  n,  s,  or  the  palatal  c.  Those  in  t  are  formed  with  the 
suffixes  -ant,  -mant,  -vant  ;  those  in  n  with  -an, 
-man,  -van,  and  -in,  -min,  -vin ;  those  in  s  with  -yams 
and  -vams ;  those  in  c  with  -anc  (properly  a  root  meaning 
to  hencl).  The  stems  in  -ant  (85-86),  -in  (87),  -yams  (88) 
have  two  forms,  strong  and  weak  ;  those  in  -an  (90-92), 
-vams  (89),  and  -anc  (93)  have  three,  strong,  middle,  and 
weakest  (73). 

Nouns  with  Two  Stems. 

85.  Stems  in  -ant  comprise  present,^  future,  and  aorist 
participles  (156)  active  (m.  and  n.).-  The  strong  stem  is  in 
-ant,  the  weak  in  -at'*;  e.g.  ad-ant  and  ad-at  ea^m^  from 
ad  eat.  These  participles  are  inflected  in  the  m.  and  n. 
only,  the  f.  having  a  special  stem  in  i.-  The  n.  inflexion 
differs  from  the  m.  in  the  N.V.A.  s.  du.  pi.  only.  The 
accent,  if  resting  on  the  suffix,  shifts  in  weak  cases  to  the 
endings  that  begin  with  vowels. 

'  Excepting  those  of  the  reduplicating  verbs  and  a  few  others  that 
follow  their  analogy  (85  h). 

-  On  the  formation  of  the  f.  stems  see  95. 

'  In  Latin  and  Greek  the  distinction  was  lost  by  normalization : 

G.  edentis,  idovTo^. 


62 


SINGULAR. 


DECLENSION 

Masculine. 

DUAL. 


[85 


PLURAL. 


t 


N.  adan^(GU.  t^coj')  adant-a  -au     adant-as  (Gk.  e^orre?) 

V.  adan  adant-a  -au     adantas 

A.  adant-am  (Lat.  edentem)     adant-a  -au 


adat-as 


I.  adat-a 
D.  adat-6 
Ab.G.  adat-as 
L.  adat-i 


N.A.  adat 


I.  adad-bhis 
D.  adad-bhyam     D.Ab.  adad-bhyas 
G.  adat-6s  G.  adat-am 

L.  adat-su 


Neuter. 
adat-i 


adant-i 


Other  examples  are :  arc-ant  singing,  sid-ant  (sad  sit), 
ghn-ant  (ban  sJaij),  y-ant  (i  go),  s-ant  (as  U) ;  pasy-ant 
seeing)  ich-smt  wishing ;  ^rnv-a.nt  doing ;  suny-ant  2ircssing  ; 
bhanj-ant  hreaJcing  ;  jan-ant  knowing  ;  janay-ant  begetting  ; 
yuyuts-ant  wishing  to  fight ;  fut.  karisy-ant  about  to  do  ;  aor. 
saks-ant  (sab  overcome). 

a.  The  analogy  of  these  participles  is  followed  by  a  few 
adjectives  that  have  lost  their  old  participial  meaning: 
rbant  ioeah,  prsant  spotted,  brbant  great,  riisant  brilliant; 
also  the  substantive  dant^  tooth.  The  adj.  mabant  great, 
also  originally  a  participle,^  deviates  from  the  participial 
declension  in  lengthening  the  vowel  of  the  suffix  in  the 
strong  forms  : 

Sing.  N.  m.  mahan ;  n.  mabat.    A.  mabant-am.    I.  mabat-a. 
Du.  N.A.  mabant-a,  -au.     D.  mabad-bbyam. 
PI.    N.    mabant-as.         A.    mabat-as.         I.    mabad-bbis. 
L.  mabat-su. 


'  For  original  addnt-s,  cp.  Lat.  edens. 

2  Probably  an  old  participle  of  ad  eat  witli  prehistoric  loss  of  the 
initial  a  like  s-dnt  being  from  as  he. 

3  From  the  root  mail  (originally  magh).     Cp.  Lat.  mag-nu-s. 


A 


85-8G]  PEESENT   PARTICIPLES  63 

J).  The  participles  of  verbs  with  a  reduplicating  present 
base,  i.  e.  those  of  the  third  class  (127,  2)  and  intensives 
(172),  do  not  distinguish  a  strong  stem,'  in  other  words, 
have  at  throughout ;  e,  g.  bibhyat  fearing,  ghanighn-at 
repeatedly  hilling  (\/han).  The  analogy  of  these  participles 
is  followed  by  a  few  others  formed  from  unreduplicated 
bases:  das-at  w  or  shipping,  sas-at  instructing;  also  daks-at 
and  dhaks-at  aor.  part,  of  dah  hum.  A  few  others,  again, 
originally  participles,  have  come  to  be  used  as  substantives 
with  a  shift  of  accent  to  the  suffix.  Three  of  these  are  f. 
and  two  m. :  vahat,'^  sravat  ^  f.  stream  ;  vehat  ^  f.  barren  cow  ; 
vaghat  m.  sacrificer ;  sascat '  m.  pursuer.  Besides  the  first 
three  substantives  just  mentioned  there  are  no  feminines 
except  the  adjective  a-sascat  unequalled ''  when  used  as  a  f. 
Hardly  any  n.  forms  occur  except  from  the  old  reduplicated 
participle  jag-at  going,  living  (from  ga  go),  used  chiefly  as 
a  substantive  meaning  tlie  animate  ivorld.  The  inflexion  of 
these  reduplicated  stems  in  at  is  like  that  of  the  compounded 
radical  t  stems  (77),  the  accent  never  shifting  to  the  endings. 

The  forms  occurring  if  made  from  dadat  giving  (-/da) 
would  be: 

Sing.  N.  m.  n.  dadat.     A.  m.  dadat-am.     I.  dadat-a.      D. 

dadat-e.     G.  dadat-as.     L.  dadat-i. 
Plur.  N.A.  dadat-as.     I.  dadad-bhis.     G.  dadat-am. 

86.  The  adjective  stems  formed  with  the  suffixes  -mant 
and  -vant,  which  both  mean  possessing,  are  inflected  exactly 
alike  and  differ  from  the  stems  in  -ant  solely  in  lengthening 
the  vowel  of  the  suffix  in  the  N.  s.  m.^   The  V.  of  these  stems 


1  Which  ]ias  been  weakened  because  here  the  accent  is  regularly 
on  the  reduplicative  syllable, 

"^  But  vah-ant  carrying  as  a  participle. 

3  But  ST&v-&-nt  flowing.       *  The  derivation  of  this  word  is  uncertain. 

^  But  s^sc-at  as  a  participle  (from  sac  accompany). 

*  Lit.  having  no  equal  ;  but  ^-saseaut-i  as  tlie  f.  of  the  participle  sascat. 

■^  The  f.  is  formed  with  i  from  the  weak  stem  :  mat-i,  vat-i  (95). 


64  DECLENSION  [86-87 

is  regularly^  formed  with  mas  and  vas  ■ ;  e.g.  ha  vis-mas 
from  havis-m.ant ;  bhaga-vas  from  bhaga-vant. 

From  go-mant  2)ossessed  ofcoivs  would  be  formed  : 

Sing.  N.  m.  g6man  ;  n.  gomat.     A.  m.  gomant-am.    L.  go- 

mat-i.     V.  m.  gomas. 
PI.  N.  m.  gomant-as  ;      n.  gomant-i.^      A.  m.  gomat-as. 

L.  gomat-su. 

87.  Adjective  stems  are  formed  with  the  suffixes  -in, 
-min,  -vin,  which  mean  iiossessing.  Those  in  -in  are  very 
common,  those  in  -vin  number  nearly  twenty,  but  there 
is  only  one  in  -min :  rg-min  praising.  They  are  declined 
in  the  m.  and  n.  only  ;  *  but  the  n.  forms  are  very  rare, 
occurring  in  the  s.  N.  I.  G.  only.  These  stems  sometimes 
come  to  be  used  as  m.  substantives  ;  e.  g.  gath-in  singer. 
As  in  all  derivative  stems  ending  in  n,  the  vowel  of  the 
suffix  is  lengthened  in  the  N.  s.  m.,  and  the  n  disappears  in 
that  case  (in  the  n.  also)  and  before  consonant  endings. 

The  forms  actually  occurring,  if  made  from  hast-in  having 
hands,  would  be  as  follows  : 

Sing.  m.  N,  hasti.   A.  hastin-am.   I.  hastin-a.   D.  hastin-e. 

Ab.G.  hastin-as.     L.  hastin-i.     V.  hastin. 
Du.  m.  N.A.    hastin-a,    -au.      I.D.    hasti-bhyam.      G.L. 

hastin-os. 
PI.  m.  N.  hastin-as.     I.  hasti-bhis.     D.  hasti-bhyas.     G. 

hastin-am.     L.  hasti-su. 
Sing.  n.  N.  hasti.     I.  hastin-a.     G.  hastin-as. 


1  There  are  sixteen  in  the  KV.  in  vas  and  only  three  in  the  later 
van  (of  which  there  are  eight  more  in  the  AV.).  There  are  six 
vocatives  in  mas  in  the  EV.,  but  no  example  of  tlie  form  in  man. 

2  There  are  also  vocatives  in  vas  from  stems  in  van  and  vams 
(cp.  the  V.  in  yas  from  stems  in  yams). 

*  The  only  two  forms  that  occur  are  ghrt&vanti  and  pasumanti. 
The  Padapatha  reads  vanti  and  manti  in  these  forms,  and  the 
lengthening  of  the  vowel  seems  metrical. 

4  The  f.  stem  is  formed  with  i  :  asvin  possessing  horses  ;  f.  a^vin-i. 


88-89] 


COMPARATIVE   STEMS   IN   YAMS 


65 


88.  3,  Comparative  stems  are  formed  with  the  suffix 
yams,  which  is  nearly  always  added  with  the  connecting 
vowel  i  to  the  accented  root.  Only  two  stems  are  formed 
with  yams  exclusively  :  jya-yams  greater  and  san-yams 
older ;  six  others  are  formed  with  yams  as  well  as  i-yams  ; 
e.g.  bhu-yams  and  bhav-iyams  more.  The  strong  stem 
is  reduced  in  the  weak  cases,  by  dropping  the  nasal  and 
shortening  the  vowel,  to  yas.  These  stems  are  declined 
in  the  m,  and  n.  only.^  No  forms  of  the  du.  occur,  and  in 
the  pi.  only  the  N.  A.  G.  are  found.  The  V.  s.  ends  in 
yas.^  The  forms  actually  occurring,  if  made  from  kan- 
iyams  younger,  would  be  as  follows : 


Masculine. 


SINGULAR. 


PLUKAL. 


N.  kaniyan 

A.  kaniyarns-am 

I.  kaniyas-a 
D.  kaniyas-e 
Ab.  G.  kaniyas-as 
L.  kaniyas-i 
V.  kaniyas 


kaniyamsas 


kaniyas-as 


G.  kaniyas-am 


Neuter. 


N.A.  kaniyas 


kaniyams-i 


The  I.D.Ab.G.  sing,  n.,  identical  with  the  m.,  also  occur. 

Nouns  with  Three  Stems. 

89.  1.  The  stem  of  the  perf.  part,  active  is  formed  with 
the  suffix  vams.  This  is  reduced  in  the  weak  cases  in  two 
ways  :  before  consonant  terminations  (by  dropping  the  nasal 


'  The  f.  is  formed  by  adding  i   to  the  weak  stem,  e.g.  pr^yas-i 
dearer. 
"^  Cp.  the  mant,  vant  (86),  and  the  vams  (89)  stems 

1819  -p 


66 


DECLENSION 


[89 


and  shortening  the  vowel)  to  vas  which  becomes  vat  ^ ; 
and  before  vowel  terminations  (by  loss  of  the  nasal  accom- 
panied by  Samprasarana)  to  us  which  becomes  us.  There 
are  thus  three  stems :  vams,  vat,  and  us.  The  accent 
always  rests  on  the  suffix  in  uncompounded  forms.  The 
inflexion  is  restricted  to  the  m.  and  n.-  The  only  specifically 
n.  form  occurring  is  the  A.  s.  The  V.  s.  is  regularly  formed 
with  vas,^  The  forms  actually  occurring,  if  made  from 
cakrvams  having  done,  would  be  as  follows  : 


SINGULAR. 


Masculine. 

DUAL. 


PLURAL. 


N.  cakrvan 

A.  cakrvams-am 

cakrvams-a 

•  • 

cakrvams- a 

•  • 

-, •  1 

cakrvams-as 

oakrus-as 

I.  cakriis-a 
D.  cakrus-e 
Ab.G.  cakr-As-as 


I.  cakrvad-bhis 


G.  cakrus-am 


V.  eakr-vas 


Neuter. 


N.A.      cakr-vat 


a.  In  about  a  dozen  of  these  participles  the  suffix  vams 
is  preceded  by  i  {either  as  a  reduced  form  of  final  radical  a 
or  as  a  connecting  vowel)  : 

jajni-van  (from  jna  Jcnoiv),  tasthi-van  (stha  stand),  papi- 
van  (pa  drinJc),  yayi-van  (ya  go),  rari-van  (ra  give) ;  ly-i-van 
{i  go),  jagm-i-van  (beside  jagan- van  ^ :  gam.  go),  papt-i-van 
{'j&tflp),  pros-i-vau  (pra-|- vas  dwell),  vivis-i-van  (vis  enter) ; 


'  Oil  the  change  of  s  to  t  cp.  66  B  1  ?). 

^  The  f.  is  formed  with  i  from  the  weakest  stem  :  e.  g.  caki-ua-i. 

'  Cp.  the  mant,  vant  (86),  and  the  yams  stems  (88). 

*-  On  the  change  of  m  to  n  see  68. 


89-90]  STEMS   IN   AN,    MAN,   VAN  G7 

ok-i-van  '  (uc  be  ivoni).  This  i  is  dropped  before  us  ;  e.  g. 
tasth-us-a,  iy-us-as,  jagm-iis-e. 

90.  2.  Nouns  in  an,  man,  van  include  a  large  number 
of  words,  those  in  van  being  by  far  the  commonest,  those 
in  an  the  least  frequent.  These  stems  are  almost  restricted 
to  m.  and  n.  ; '"  but  some  forms  of  adjective  stems  serve  as  f., 
and  there  is  one  specifically  f.  stem  yos-an  tvomnn. 

In  the  strong  cases  the  a  of  the  suffix  is  visually  lengthened, 
e.  g.  adiivan-am  ;  but  in  half  a  dozen  an  and  man  stems  it 
remains  unchanged,  e.  g.  arya-man-am.  In  the  weak  cases 
the  a  is  often  syncopated  before  vowel  endings,  though 
never  when  man  and  van  are  preceded  by  a  consonant, 
e.  g.  I.  s.  gravna  from  gravan  pressing  stone  (but  as-man-a 
stone),  while  before  consonant  endings  the  final  n  disappears,^ 
e.g.  raja-bhis.  In  the  RV.  syncopation  never  takes  place 
in  the  N.A.  du.  n.,  nor  with  one  exception  (sata-davni) 
in  the  L.  s. 

As  in  all  other  n  stems,  the  nasal  is  dropped  in  the  N.  s., 
e.  g.  m.  adhva,  n.  karma.  But  there  are  two  peculiarities 
of  inflexion  which,  being  common  to  these  three  groups,  do 
not  appear  elsewhere  in  the  consonant  declension.  The 
ending  of  the  L.  s.  is  in  the  EV.  dropped  more  often  than 
not ;  e.  g.  miirdhan  beside  murdhan-i  on  the  head.  In  the 
N.A.  pi.  n.  both  the  final  n  of  the  stem  and  the  termination  i 
are,  in  the  RV.,  dropped  in  nineteen  stems,  e.g.  karma;* 
while  they  are  retained  in  eighteen,  e.  g.  karmani. 

1.  The  an  stems,  which  are  both  m.  and  n.,"  besides  the 


1  With  reversion  to  guttural,  lack  of  reduplication,  and  strengthened 
radical  vowel. 

2  The  stems  in  an  and  man  form  their  f.  with  i  added  to  their 
weakest  form  ;  those  in  van  substitute  vari. 

°  That  is,  the  a  represents  an  original  sonant  nasal. 

*  Seven  of  these  appear  with  a  in  the  Samhita  text,  but  with  a,  like 
the  rest,  in  the  Pada  text.  The  evidence  of  the  Avesta  indicates  that 
the  a  form  of  the  Samhita  is  the  older. 

^  Six  or  seven  adjectival  forms  ai-e  used  as  f. 

f2 


68 


DECLENSION 


[90 


one  f.   yosan,   .ire   not   numerous.      In   the   strong   forms 

rbhu-ksan  chief  of  the  Rhhus,  pus-an,  a  god,  and  y6s-an 

ivoman  retain  short  a ;  tiks-an  ox  and  vfs-an  hull  fluctuate 

between  a  and  a.     In  the  inflexion  of  these  stems  (unlike 

those  in  man  and  van)  the  concurrence  of  three  consonants 

is  not  avoided  ;  e.  g.  sirsn-a,  I.  of  sirs-an. 

o.  Six  stems  belong  etymologically  to  this  group  though  seeming  to 
belong  to  one  of  the  other  two.  They  are :  yu-v-an '  m,  youth,  sv-dn  ^  m. 
dog,  rjf-svan^  m.  a  man,  matari-s van ^  m.  a  demi-god,  vi-bhv-an^/ar- 
reaching,  pari-jm-an*  going  round,  sirs-dn  n.  is  an  extended  form  of 
siras  head  =  sir(a)s-din. 

The  normal  forms,  if  made  from  rajan  Mng,  would  be  : 


SINGULAR. 

DUAL. 

PLURAL. 

N.  raja 

A.  rajan-am 

V.  rajan  ^ 

N.A. 

rajan-a, 

-au 

N. 

rajan-as 

A. 

rajn-as 

I.D.  raja-bhyam 


I.  raja-bhis 
D.  raja-bhyas 
G.  raj  n- am 


L.  raja-su 


I.  rajn-a 
D.  rajn-e 
Ab.G.  rajn-as  G.  rajn-os 

L.  rajan-i 
rajan 

The  n.  differs  in  the  N.A.  only.  No  example  of  the  s.  N.A. 
occurs  (p.  70,  n.  1).  But  the  du.  of  ahan  dai/  is  ahan-i,  pi. 
ahan-i. 

2.  The  stems  in  man  are  about  equally  divided  between 
m.  and  n.,  the  former  being  mostly  agenii  nouns,  the  latter 
verbal  abstracts.  About  a  dozen  forms  from  these  stems 
as  final  members  of  compounds  are  used  as  feminines.*'     In 


1  See  below,  91.  3,  4.  "  Probably  from  su^)o?w. 

3  From  bhu  be.  *  Fj-om  gam  go. 

^  The  V.  of  matari-svan  is  matari-svas  as  if  from  a  stem  in  van. 

^  No  certain  examples  of  f.  formed  with  i  from  man  stems  are 
found  in  the  RV.,  though  the  AV.  has  five  sucli  at  the  end  of 
compounds. 


90]  STEMS   IN   MAN  69 

the  strong  forms  arya-man  ra.  a  god,  t-man  ni.  self,  j6-man 
victorious  retain  the  short  vowel  in  the  suffix.  In  the  weak 
forms,  even  when  the  suffix  is  preceded  by  a  vowel,  about 
a  dozen  forms  do  not  syncopate  the  a,  e.  g.  bhu-man-a, 
da-man-e.  In  the  I.  s.  seven  stems  not  only  syncopate,  but 
drop  either  the  m  or  the  n  as  well :  prathi-n-a,  pre-n-a, 
bhu-n-a,  mahi-n-a,  vari-n-a;  draghm-a,  rasm-a. 

The  normal  forms,   if  made  from  as-man  (Gk.  dKfj.coi/) 
m.  stone,  would  be: — 

Sing.  N.  asma.  A.  asman-am.  I.  asman-a.'  D.  asman-e.' 
Ab.G.  asman-as.    L.  asman-i  and  asman.    V.  asman. 

Du.  N.A.V.  asman-a.     L.  asman-os. 

Plur.  N.V.  asman-as.  A.  asman-as.  I.  asma-bhis.  D. 
asma-bhyas.     Gr.  asman-am.     L.  asma-su. 

The  n.  differs  in  the  N.A.  only.  These  cases  from 
karman  act  are : 

Sing,  karma.  Du.  karman-i.  PL  karman-i,  karma, 
karma. 

3.  The  stems  in  van  are  chiefly  verbal  adjectives  and 
are  almost  exclusively  declined  in  the  m.  Hardly  a  dozen 
of  them  make  n.  forms,  and  only  five  or  six  forms  are  used 
as  f.^  In  the  strong  cases  there  is  only  one  example  of 
the  a  remaining  short :  anarvan-am.  In  the  weak  cases, 
when  the  suffix  is  preceded  by  a  vowel,  the  a  is  always 
syncopated  in  the  Samhita  text  except  in  the  forms  da-van-e, 
vasu-van-e,  and  rta-van-i.  The  V.  is  usually  formed  in 
van,  but  there  are  four  in  vas :  rta-vas,  eva-ya-vas, 
pratar-it-vas,  vi-bha-vas.^ 


1  When  the  suffix  is  preceded  by  a  voXvel,  the  a  is  generally  synco- 
pated, as  mahi-mn-a,  also  mahi-n-a,  &c. 

2  The  f.  of  these  stems  is  otherwise  formed  with  i,  which  is,  how- 
ever, never  added  to  van,  but  regularly  to  a  collateral  suffix  vara. 
Twenty-five  such  stems  in  vari  are  found  in  the  RV. 

^  Cp.  the  mant,  vant,  yams,  vams  stems. 


70 


DECLENSION 


[90-91 


The  normal  forms  occurring,  if  made  from  gra-van  m. 
pressing-stone,  would  be : 

Sing.  N.  grava,    A.  gravan-am.    I.  gravn-a.    D.  gravn-e. 

Ab.G.  gravn-as.  L.  gravan-i  and  gravan.  V.  gravan. 
Du.  N.A.V.  gravan-a,  -au.  I.  grava-bhyam.  G.  gravn-os. 
PL  N.V.   gravan-as.      A.   gravn-as.      I.   grava- bhis.      D. 

grava-bhyas.     G.  gravn-am.     L.  grava-su. 

The  n.  differs  in  the  N.A.  only.  These  cases  (the  du. 
does  not  occur)  formed  from  dhanvan  hoiv  are :  Sing. 
dhanva.     PI.  dhanvani,  dhanva,  dhanva. 

Irregular  Stems  in  an. 

91.  1.  Pdnth-an  m.  path,  forming  the  strong  stem 
panthan,  is  best  treated  under  the  irregular  stems  in 
radical  a  (97  A.  2  a). 

2.  ah-an  n.  day,  otherwise  regular,  supplements  the  N.  s. 
with  ah-ar.' 

3.  sv-an  m.  dog,  otherwise  inflected  lilie  rajau,  takes 
Samprasarana  in  its  weakest  stem  sun,^  which,  as  represent- 
ing an  originally  disyllabic  stem,^  retains  the  accent : 


SINGULAR. 

DUAL. 

PLURAL. 

N.  sva  [kvoov) 
A.  svan-am 

svan-a,  -au 
svan-a,  -au 

svan-a.s 

sun-as 

I.  sun-a 

G.  sun-as  [kvvos) 


I.  sva-bhis 
D.  sva-bhyas 


G.  siin-am 


^  The  normal  N.  in  a  appears  to  have  been  avoided  in  an  stems, 
collatei-al  stems  always  being  substituted  in  this  case,  as  dksi  for 
aksdn  eye,  &c. 

2  So  also  in  Greek  :  kvvus  =  sun-as. 

*  Cp.  Greek  kvuv. 


91-02]  . 


IKREGULAE  STEMS   IN   AN 


71 


4,  yii-v-an,  m.  youth,  otherwise  regular,  forms  its  weakest 
stem,  yun,  by  Samprasarana  and  contraction  ^  (yii-un) : 


SINGULAR. 


DUAL. 


PLURAL. 


N.  yuva 
V.  yuvan 
A.  yuvan-am 


N.A.  yiivan-a         N.V.  yuvan- 


as 


D.  yiin-e^ 
G.  yxin-as 


A.  yun-as 

I.  yuva-bhis 
D.  yuva-bhyas 


5.  magha-van  ^  hounti/ul,  an  epithet  of  Indra,  also  forms 
its  weakest  stem,  maghon,  by  Samprasarana  and  contraction 
(magha-un) : 

SINGULAR. 


DUAL. 


PLURAL. 


N.  magha-va 
V.  magha-van 
A.  magha-van-am 


magha-van-a 


magha-van-as 


G.  maghon-as 


maghon-os 


maghon-as 
maghon-am 


6.  udhan  n.  udder  supplements  the  N.  s.  with  udhar 
and  udhas ;  before  consonant  endings,  the  latter  stem  also 
occurs  :  pi.  L.  udhas-su, 

92.  The  root  han,  which  forms  the  final  member  of 
thirty-five  compounds  in  the  RV.,  follows,  for  the  most  part, 
the  analogy  of  derivative  stems  in  an.     The  strong  stem  is 


'  Cp.  Lat.  juven-is  and  jun-ior. 

2  The  stem  retains  the  accent  because  it  represents  a  disyllable  ; 
cp.  sv^n. 

*  The  supplementary  stem  magh^-vant  is  also  used  in  the  following 
cases :  N.  raaghivan.  PI.  I.  maghavad-bhis.  D.  magh^vad-bhyas. 
L.  maghfivat-su. 


72 


DECLENSION 


[92-93 


-ban  (with  a  long  vowel  in  the  N.  s.  only),  the  middle  is  -ha, 
and  the  weakest  -ghn.^  The  cases  that  occur  would  in  the 
compound  vrtra-han  Vrtra-slaying  be  : 


SINGULAR. 


DUAL. 


PLURAL. 


N.  vrtra-ha           N.A.  vrtra-han-a, 
v.  vrtra-han 
A.  vrtra-hanam 

-au 

N.  vrtra-han-as 

A.  vrtra-ghn-as 

I.  vrtra-ghn-a 
D.  vrtra-ghn-6 
G.  vrtra-ghn-as 
L.  vrtra-ghn-i 


I.  vrtra-ha-bhis 


3.  Adjectives  in  anc. 

93.  These  words,  the  suffix "  of  which  generally  expresses 
the  meaning  of  -ivarcl,  form  the  strong  stem  in  anc,  the 
middle  in  Tc  or  uc  ^  (according  as  ac  is  preceded  by  y  or  v). 
About  fourteen  stems  have  a  weakest  form  in  ie,  and  about 
six  in  uc,  which,  if  they  are  the  contractions  of  accented 
syllables,  shift  the  accent  to  the  endings.^  They  are  inflected 
in  the  m.  and  n.  only,  the  f.  being  formed  with  i  from  the 
weakest  stem.  The  only  cases  occurring  in  the  pi.  are  the 
N.A.  and  in  the  du.  N.A.L. 

The  forms  actually  found,  if  made  from  praty-anc  turned 
totvards,  would  be : 


^  Here  the  li  reverts  to  the  original  guttural  aspirate  ;  the  n  in  this 
combination  is  never  cerebralized. 

-  Properly  the  root  anc  bend,  which  has,  however,  practically 
acquired  the  character  of  a  suffix. 

^  Here  ya  and  va  irregularly  contract  to  i  and  u,  instead  of  i  and  u. 

*  This  is  the  general  rule  of  the  RV.,  but  not  of  the  AV.  Thus 
A.  pi.  pratic-as  RV.,  pratic-as  AV. 


93] 


ADJECTIVES   IN   ANC 


73 


SINGULAR. 


Masculine. 

DUAL. 


PLURAL. 


N.  pratyan  (61)       N.A.  pratyafic-a,  -au        N.  pratyanc-as 
A.  pratyanc-am 


A.  pratic-as 


I.  pratic-a 
D.  pratic-6 
Ab.G.  pratie-as 
L.  pratic-i 


N.A.  pratyak 


L.  pratic-6s 

Neuter. 
pratic-i 


a.  Other  words  similarly  declined  are 
Strong  Stem. 


Middle 

Stem. 


ny-aSc  downward  ny-ak 

sam-y-anc  ^  united  sam-y-ak 

tir-y-anc  ^  transverse  tir-y-ak 

lid-anc  upivard  ud-ak 

anv-anc  follotving  anv-ak 

visv-afic  all-pervading  visv-ak 


Weakest 
Stem, 

nic^ 

sam-ic 

tiras-c 

lid-ic ' 

anuc 

visuc 


b.  About  a  dozen  stems,  in  which  the  anc  is  preceded 
by  a  word  ending  in  a,  have  no  weakest  form.  Such  are 
apanc  backward,  arvane  Jdtherward,  avafic  dowmvard,  devanc 
godivard,  paranc  turned  atvay,  pranc  forward.     The  only 


^  The  stem  nic  seems  to  have  retained  the  accent ;  for  the  f.  is  nic-i 
(not  nic-i),  and  the  I.  nica  being  used  adverbially  probably  has  an 
adverbial  shift  of  accent,  devadrydnc  godward  also  retains  the  accent 
on  the  suffix  :  I.  devadrica. 

^  The  y  is  here  inserted  by  analogy. 

^  Here  tiri  takes  the  place  of  tiras  across,  from  which  the  weakest 
stem  tirasc  (=  tirds  +  ae)  is  formed. 


i  i 


i,  though  no  y  precedes  the  a  of  the  suffix,  by  analogy. 


74  DECLENSION  [93-95 

cases  occurring  in  the  clu.  and  pi.  aie  the  N.A.  m.     The 
inflexion  of  these  words  may  be  illustrated  by  apanc  : 
Sing.    m.    N.    apan   (61).        A.    apanc-am.        I.    apac-a. 

L.  apae-i. 
Du.  N.A.  apanc-a,  apanc-au. 
PI.  N.  apanc-as.     A.  apac-as. 

The  only  distinctively  n.  form  is  N.A.  s.  prak.^  The  f.  is 
formed  from  the  weak  stem  with  i :  prac-i. 

94.  The  points  to  be  noted  about  changeable  stems  are  : 

1.  The  vowel  of  the  suffix  is  lengthened  in  the  N.  s.  m. 
except  in  ant  and  anc  stems  :  g6-man,  agni-van ;  kaniyan ; 
cakr-van;  raja;  asma,  grava,  yiiv-a;  hasti,  rg-mi, 
taras-vi ;  but  ad-an,  pratyan. 

2.  The  N.  sing,  ends  in  a  nasal  in  all  changeable  stems 
except  those  in  n,  which  drop  it. 

3.  All  changeable  stems  that  lengthen  the  vowel  in  the 
N.  s.  m.  shorten  it  in  the  V.  Those  that  drop  the  n  in 
the  N.,  retain  it  in  the  V.,  while  those  that  have  n  (after  a) 
in  the  N.  drop  it  in  the  V.,  and  add  s  : 

thus  rajan  (N.  raja),"  asman  (N.  asma),  gravan  (N. 
grava),  yuvan  (N.  yiiva);^  hastin  (N.  hasti);  havismas 
(N.  havisman),  marutvas  ^  (N.  marutvan) ;  kaniyas  (N. 
kaniyan) ;  cakrvas  (N.  cakrvan). 

a.  The  only  changeable  stems  in  which  the  V.  does  not  differ  in  form 
(though  it  does  in  accent)  from  the  N.  are  the  ant  and  anc  stems  : 
ddan  (N.  adan)  ;  pratyan  (N.  pratydn). 

95.  The  feminines  of  nouns  with  changeable  stems  are 


1  In  B.  some  half-dozen  N.A.  plur.  n.  forms  occur  :  pranci,  praty- 
aiici,  arvafici,  samyanci,  sadhryanci,  anvanci. 

^  One  an  stem  has  a  V.  in  as  :  matari-sv-as  (p.  68,  n.  5). 

^  Four  van  stems  form  their  V.  in  vas  :  rta-vas,  eva-ya-vas,  pratar- 
it-vas,  vi-bha-vas. 

*  The  RV.  has  three  vocatives  in  van  :  arvan,  i§atavan,  ^avasavan. 
The  AV.  has  five  others,  but  none  in  vas. 


95-9(5]     FEMININES   OF   CHANGEABLE   STEMS       75 

formed  by  adding  i  to  the  weak  stem  (when  there  are  two 
stems)  or  the  weakest  (when  there  are  three) ;  e.  g.  adat-i 
(m.  adant);  dhenumat-i  (m.  dhenumant),  amavat-i  (m. 
amavant)  ;  arkin-i  (m.  arkin) ;  navyas-i  (m.  naviyams) ; 
jagmus-i(m.jagm-i-vams);  sam-rajn-i(m.rajan),  maghon-i 
(m.  maghavan),  -ghn-i  (rn.  -han) ;  pratic-i  (m.  pratyanc) ; 
avitr-i  (m.  avitar). 

a.  The  f.  of  the  present  participle  active  of  the  first  conjugation 
(125)  is  made  from  the  strong  m.  stem  in  ant  (cp.  156);  that  of 
the  second  conjugation  from  the  weak  stem  in  at ;  e.  g.  bhavant-i 
being,  uchant-i '  shining,  pusyant-i  obtaining  abundantly,  coddyant-i 
urging  ;  but  ghnat-i  (m.  ghnant)  slaying,  -pipvaX-l  furthering  (m,  piprat), 
krnvafr-i  (m.  krnv^nt),  yunjat-i  (m.  ynnjdnt)  yoking,  puriat-i  (m. 
pundnt)  purifying. 

b.  The  f.  of  the  simple  future  participle  is  foi'med  like  the  present 
participle  of  the  first  conjugation  :  sii-syant-i  about  to  bring  forth,  san- 
isy^nt-i  going  to  obtain. 

c.  Adjectives  in  van  form  their  f.  in  var-i  ;  e.  g.  pi-van  (iriajv)  fat, 
f.  pi-var-i  {nUtpa  —  niffpia).  The  f.  of  the  irregular  yii-v-an  young 
(91.  4)  is  yuva-ti. 


Irregular  Nouns  with  Changeable  Stems. 

96.  1.  ap  f.  water  lengthens  its  vowel  in  the  strong  cases 
du.  and  pi.  and  substitutes  t  for  p  before  bh.  The  forms 
occurring  are : 

Sing.  I.  ap-a.  Ab.G.  ap-as.  Du.  N.  apa.-  Pi.  N.V. 
ap-as.  A.  ap-as.  I.  ad-bhis.  D.  ad-bhyas.  G.  ap-am. 
L.  ap-sii. 

2.  anad-vah  m.  ox  (lit.  cart- drawer,  from  anas  +  vah)  has 
three  stems:  the  last  syllable  is  lengthened  in  the  strong 
stem  anad-vah ;  and  shortened  by  Samprasarana  in  the 
weakest  anad-uh  and  in  the  middle  anad-ud  (dissimilated 


^  Tlie  weak   stem   appears  once  in  sinc-at-i  sprinkling  beside   the 
gular  sine-din t-i. 
^  In  a  compound. 


76 


DECLENSION 


[96-97 


for  anad-ud).     The  N.   is   irregularly  formed   as  if  from 
a  stem  in  vant.     The  forms  occurring  are : 


SINGULAR. 


DUAL. 


PLURAL. 


N.  anad-van 
A.  anad-vah-am 

N.  anad-vah-au 
A.  anad-vah-au 

N.  anad-vah-as 

A.  anad-uh-as 

G.  anad-uh-as 
L.  anad-iih-i 


D.  anad-tid-bhis 
L.  anad-ut-su 


3.  pu-mams^  m.  man  has  three  forms  :  its  a  is  lengthened 
in  the  strong  stem,  and  syncopated  in  the  weakest  to  pums, 
in  the  middle  to  pum.^     The  forms  occurring  are  : 


SINGULAR. 


PLURAL. 


N.  puman  (89.  1) 

V.  pumas 

A.  pumams-am 


Ab.Gr.  pums-as 
L.  pums-i 


pumams-as 

pums-as 
Gr.  pums-am 


L.  pum-su 


II.  Stems  ending  in  Vowels. 

97.  A.  1.  The  stems  in  derivative  a  (m.  n.)'  and  a  (f.)^ 
constitute  the  most  important  declensions  because  the  former 
embraces  more  than  one  half  of  all  nominal  stems,  and  the 
latter  includes  more  feminines  than  any  other  declension. 


1  Probably  an  old  compound,  with   the  second  part  of  which  the 
Lat.  mas  '  male '  may  be  allied. 

2  With  necessary  loss  of  the  s  between  consonants  :  cp.  28  and  16  a. 
*  N.  -as,  -am  =  Gk.  -os,  -ov  ;  Lat.  -us,  -urn. 


4   .5 


Gk.  -a,  -T] ;  Lat. 


97] 


STEMS   IN   A   AND    A 


i  I 


These  two  declensions '  are  also  the  most 
endings  diverge   from   the   normal   ones 
elsewhere.     The  a  declension  is  the  only 
N.A.  n.  has  an  ending  in  the  singular, 
Ab.  s.  is  distinguished  from  the  G.     The 
differs  from  that  of  the  m.  in  the  N.A.V.  s, 
The  forms  actually  occurring,   if  made 
would  be  : 


irregular  since  the 
here   more   than 

one  in  which  the 
and  in  which  the 
inflexion  of  the  n. 
.  du.,  and  pi.  only. 

from  priya  dear, 


Singular. 

Plural. 

MASC. 

FEM. 

MASC. 

FEM. 

N. 

priya-s 

priya 

N.- 

priyas 
priyasas^ 

priyas 
priyasas  '^ 

A. 

priya-m 

priya-m 

A.   priyan^ 

priyas 

I. 

priy^na  - 
priya  ^ 

( priyaya  - 
I  priya 

I.  fpriyais® 
Ipriy^bhis 

priyabhis 

D. 

Ab. 
G. 
L. 
V. 

priyaya 
priyat  ^ 
priyasya  \ 
priy6 
priya 

priya-yai  •' 

priya-yas^ 

priya-yam  ° 
priye  ® 

D.Ab.  priyabhyas 

G.  priya-n-am  " 
L.  priyasu" 
V.  ( priyas 

priyabhyas 

priya-n-am 
priyasu '' 
priyas 

priyasas 

Dual.  N.A.  m.  priya,^^  priyau ;  f.  priy6. 
I. D.Ab.  m.  f.  n.  priyabhyam. 
G.L.  m.f  n.  priya-y-os. 


*  Certain  adjectives  in  -as  -a  -am  follow  the  pronominal  declension 
(110). 

2  These  terminations  originally  came  from  the  pronominal  declen- 
sion (110).    The  final  of  ana  is  often  lengthened  (ena). 

3  This  form,  made  with  the  normal  I.  ending  a,  is  rare. 

*  This  ending  is  preserved  in  the  Lat.  o  for  od  (e.g.  Gnaivocl  in 
inscriptions)  and  in  the  Greek  (Cretic)  adverb  rai-Se  hence. 

5  The  terminations  yai  (  =  ya-e),  yas  (=  ya-as),  yam  are  due  to 
the  influence  of  tlie  feminines  in  i  (originally  ya),  e.g.  devydi, 
devyas,  devyam  (ep.  100  . 

(For  notes  "^'^  see  next  page.) 


78  DECLENSION  [97 

a.  The  N.  A.  neuter  forms  are  :  Sing,  priya-m.    Du.  priy6. 

PI.  priya"  and  priya-n-i.'^ 

a.  In  the  Brahmanas  and  Sutras  the  D.  s.  f.  ending  ai  is  used  instead 
of  the  Ab.G.  ending  as  both  in  tliis  declension  and  elsewhere  (98.  3  a)  ; 
e.  g.  jirnayai  tvacah  of  dead  skin. 

2.  Eadical  a  stems,  m.  and  f./''  are  common  in  the  RV., 
being  formed  from  about  thirty  roots.  Most  of  them  appear 
only  as  the  final  member  of  compounds,  but  four  are  used  as 
monosyllables  in  the  m.  :  ja  child,  tra  protector,  da  giver, 
stha  standing;  and  seven  in  the  f . :  ksa  abode,  'kh.a.  ivell, 
gna  divine  woman,  ja  child,  jya  bowstring,  ma  measure, 
vra  troop^''     The  forms  occurring  in  the  oblique  cases  are  so 


6  The  form  amba,  occurring  thrice  in  the  RV.,  may  have  a  V. 
meaning,  0  mother !  The  VS.  and  TS.  have  the  V.  ambe  as  from  a  stem 
d.niba  mother. 

'^  This  form  seems  to  consist  of  a  double  ending  :  as-as.  The  form 
in  as  is  about  twice  in  the  RV.  and  twenty-four  times  in  the  AV.  as 
frequent  as  that  in  asas. 

8  That  the  ending  was  originally  -ns  is  shown  by  the  Sandhi  (40.  2) ; 
ep.  Gothic  -cms,  Gk.  inscr.  -ors. 

3  This  ending  is  preserved  in  such  Greek  datives  as  imrois.  It  is 
slightly  commoner  in  the  RV.  than  priy^bhis,  but  in  the  AV.  it  is 
five  times  as  common.     It  is  almost  always  used  in  the  Brahmanas. 

10  The  n  seems  to  have  been  due  to  the  iniluence  of  the  n  stems. 

11  The  u  of  su  is  almost  invariably  to  be  read  with  hiatus,   even 

before  u. 

12  This  form  is  rare  in  the  RV.,  being  probably  due  to  the  influence 

of  the  maiiy  masculines. 

13  The  du.  in  a  is  more  than  seven  times  as  common  as  that  in  au 

in  the  RV. 

1*  The  form  in  a  is  commoner  in  the  RV.  than  that  in  ani  in  the 
proportion  of  three  to  two.     In  the  AV.  the  proportion  is  reversed. 

'5  This  form  is  due  to  the  influence  of  the  an  stems,  which  form 
their  n.  pi.  in  both  a  and  ani,  e.  g.  nama  and  namani. 

16  There  are  no  distinctively  n.  forms,  as  the  radical  vowel  in  that 
"■ender  is  always  shortened  to  a,  and  the  stem  is  tlien  inflected 
according  to  the  derivative      declension. 

1''  These  stems  become  less  common  in  the  later  Sarnhitas,  where 
they  often  shorten  the  final  vowel  to  a,  and^  are  then  inflected  like 
derivative  a  stems. 


97-98]  EADICAL   A   STEMS  79 

rare  that  some  endings,  such  as  those  of  the  L.  s.,  the 
G.L.  du.,  and  the  Gr.  pi.  are  not  represented  at  all.  The  ni. 
always  takes  s  in  the  N.  s.,  but  the  f.  often  drops  it, 
doubtless  owing  to  the  influence  of  the  derivative  a  stems. 
The  radical  vowel  is  dropped  before  the  endings  e'  and  as 
of  tlie  D.  and  G.  s.  The  forms  actually  occurring,  if  made 
from  j a  child  m.  f.,  would  be: 
Sing.  N.  ja-s,  f.  also  ja.     A.  jam.     I.  ja.     D.  j-6,     G.  j-as. 

V.  ja-s. 
Dual.  N.A.V.  ja  and  jau.     I.  ja-bhyam.- 
Plur.   N.  jas.      A.  jas.      I.  ja-bhis.      D.   ja-bhyas.      Ab. 

ja-bhyas.     L.  ja-su. 

a.  Five  anomalously  formed  m.  derivative  stems  in  a  follow  the 
analogy  of  the  radical  a  stems. 

Tlie  strong  stem  of  pathi  m.  path  is  in  the  RV.  pfetha  only :  Sing.  N. 
pdntha-s.  A.  p^ntlia-m.  PI.  N.  pduthas.  The  AV.  has  besides  the 
stem  pdnthan  :  Sing.  N.  pdntha.    A.  panthanam.    PI.  N.  panthau-as. 

From  the  adverb  tatha  thus  is  formed  the  sing.  N.  a-tatha-s  not  say- 
ing '  yes '. 

usana  m.,  a  seer,  has  a  N.  like  a  f. :  usana.    A.  usana-m.    D.  usan-e. 

mantha  churning  stick  and  maha  great  form  the  A.  m^ntha-m  and 
maha-rn. 

8.  Radical  a  stems,  m.  n.,  numbering  about  twenty, 
consist  almost  entirely  of  stems  in  radical  a  that  has  been 
shortened  to  a.  Excepting  kha  n,  a^erfure  they  appear  as 
final  members  of  compounds  only;  e.g.  prathaDaa-jay^rs^ 
horn,  -ha  slaying  is  a  reduced  form  of  han  ;  e.  g.  satru-ha 
slaying  enemies. 

98.  B.    Stems  in  i  and  u  (m.f.n.). 

Both  declensions  embrace  a  large  number  of  nouns  of  all 
genders.  But  the  i  declension  contains  comparatively  few 
n.  stems,  and,  excepting  the  N.A.  s.  and  pi.,  n.  forms  are 


^  Not,  however,  in  most  of  the  dative  infinitives  ;  e.  g.  para-dai  to 
give  up,  pra-khyai  to  see,  prati-mai  imitate  (cp.  167). 

^  Contrary  to  the  rule  generally  ajiplicable  to  monosyllabic  stems, 
the  accent  remains  on  thfe  radical  syllable  tliroughout. 


80 


DECLENSION 


[98 


rare  in  it,  not  occurring  at  .ill  in  several  cases.  In  the 
u  declension  the  masculines  greatly  preponderate,  being 
about  four  times  as  numerous  as  the  f.  and  n.  stems  taken 
together,  while  the  neuters  here  greatly  outnumber  the 
feminines.  The  inflexion,  which  is  closely  parallel  in  both 
groups,  is  practically  the  same  in  all  genders  except  that 
the  N.A.  s.  and  pi.  n.  differ  from  the  m.  and  f.,  and  the 
A.  pi.  m.  and  f.  differ  from  each  other.  The  final  vowel  of 
the  stem  shows  Guna  in  three  of  the  weak  cases  of  the  s. 
(D.Ab.G.),  as  well  as  in  the  V.  s.  and  the  N.  pL  m.  f., 
while  it  is  abnormally  strengthened  in  the  L.  s.  The 
normal  ending  as  of  the  Ab.G.  s.  is  reduced  to  s,  while 
that  of  the  L.  s.  is  always  dropped  in  the  i  declension  and 
usually  in  the  u  declension.  The  inflexion  of  the  n  stems 
has  influenced  the  i  declension  in  the  I.  s.  only,  but  the 
u  declension  in  the  G.Ab.  and  L.  also.  Oxytone  stems, 
when  i  and  u  are  changed  to  y  and  v,  throw  the  accent  on 
a  following  vowel,  not  as  Svarita,  but  as  Udatta,  and  even 
on  the  nam  of  the  G.  pi.,  though  the  stem  vowel  in  that 
case  does  not  lose  its  syllabic  value. 

The  adjectives  siic-i  IrUjlit  and  madh-u  sweet  may  be  used 
to  illustrate  the  forms  actually  occurring : 

Singular. 


m. 


N.  stici-s 
A.  suci-m 
-J-  jsucy-a     jo.^v.j 
I  suci-n-a  j  siici 
[suci 


suci-s 
suci-m 
'  siicy-a  '^ 


n. 

suci 
suci 

suci-n-a 


m. 

madhu-s 
madhu-m 
madhv-a  ^ 
madhu-n-a 


f.  n. 

madhu-s  madhu 
madhu-m  madhu 
madhv-a 

madhu-n- 


1  Five  Btems  in  the  EV.  form  their  I.  like  siicya,  but  twenty-five 
(under  the  influence  of  the  n  declension)  like  siicina. 

2  This  is  the  normal  formation,  but  the  contracted  form  in  i  is  more 
than  twice  as  common  in  the  EV.  The  latter  is  in  the  EV.  further 
shortened  to  i  in  about  a  dozen  words. 

3  The  normally  formed  I.  in  a  is  made  in  the  m.  by  only  four  stems, 
but  that  with  na  by  thirty  in  the  EV. ;  in  the  n.  the  na  form  is  used 
almost  exclusively. 


m.  f.  n.  m. 

D.  ^ucay-e    siicay-e^    siicaye      madhav-e'^ 


G.  i5uce-s       suce-s°       suce-s     jmadho-s^ 

Imadhv-as 
siica         j  madhav-i  ^ 
sucau      1  madhau 


suca '"' 


tr   (suca 

sucau       sucau 


V.  suce 


98] 


DERIVATIVE   STEMS  IN   I   AND   U 


81 


n. 


madhav-e  f  madhav-e  " 
,madhu-n-e 


b.  suce-s^     siice-s         [suce-s]    raadho-s        madho-s 


suce 


[suci]        madho 
Dual. 


madho-s  " 
Imadhu-n-as 

madho-s    f  madho-s  ^^ 
1  ra.adhu-n-as 
[  madhav-i  '^ 

madhau    \  madhau 

[madhu-n-i 

madho        madhu 


[.A.V.  suci^   Slid 


suci 


D.Ab.  suci-bhyam 

r.L.  siiey-os 


madhu  ^        madhu         madhv-i " 
madhv-os    madhv-os    madhu-n-os'' 


i-n-a 


^  ari  m.f.  deroitt  and  fivi  m.  sheep  have  ary-Ss  and  ^vy-as. 
2  The  form  in  au  is  more  than  twice  as  common  as  that  in  a  in 
m.  and  f. 

^  The  derivative  1,  u  and  i  stems  are  the  only  ones  that  do  not  take 
a  or  an  in  the  dual. 

*  uti  with  aid  is  often  used  as  a  D.     The  RV.  has  seven  datives  in  ai, 
e.g.  bhrty-di /or  sustenance,  following  the  analogy  of  the  i  declension. 
®  The  RV.  has  six  forms  according  to  the  i  declension,  e.  g.  yuvaty-as. 
•^  The  form  vidi  on  the  altar,  occurring  twice,  is  the  only  L.  from  an 
i  stem  with  the  normal  ending  i  (  =  vedi-i). 

'  This  type  occurs  from  over  sixty  stems,  the   normal  formation 
(m^dhv-e)  from  only  three  stems  in  the  RV. 

^  The  normally  formed  type  m^dhv-as  is  followed  by  six  stems,  the 
prevailing  type  madho-s  by  over  seventy  in  the  RV. 

■'  Seven  stems  follow  this  type,  while  nineteen  follow  madhau  in 
the  RV. 
'"  Prom  one  stem  also  madhv-e. 
'^  Once  also  mddhv-as. 
^^  Also  madhv-as,  vdsv-as. 
^^  Only  in  the  form  sanav-i. 

'■*  Tlie  only  example   in  RV.  is  urv-i  the  two  earths.     The  VS.  has 
janu-n-i  two  knees. 
'^  The  only  example  is  janu-n-os  (AV.). 

1819  Q 


82 


DECLENSION 


[98 


Plural. 


m. 


n. 


N.V.  sucay-as^  sucay-as^jsiici* 

A.  siici-n  ^      suci-s       )  suci-n-i  madhu-n 


m.  f. 

madhav-as'  madhav-as 


I. 

D.Ab. 

G. 

L. 


suci-bhis 
suci-bhyas 
suei-n-am 
suci-su 


madhu-s 


madhu-bhis 
madhu-bhyas 
madhu-n-am 
madhxi-su 


n. 


madhu 
madhu 
madhu- 


a.  Twenty-seven  i  stems  in  the  RV.  show  forms  according  to  the 
derivative  i  declension  in  the  D.Ab.G.L.  s. f.  :  e.g.  bhrti  f.  sustenance: 
D.  bhrty-ai ;  bhiimi  f.  earth:  Ab.G.  bhumy-as,  L.  bhiimy-ani.  Such 
forms  in  ai,  as,  am  are  much  commoner  in  the  AV.  In  B.  ai  is 
regularly  used  instead  of  as  (cp.  97  a  a).  Besides  the  numerous  I.  s. 
forms  in  na  the  EV.  has  half  a  dozen  i  stems  showing  the  influence 
of  the  n  declension  in  the  incipient  use  of  the  endings  ni  in  the 
N.A.V.  du.  n.  and  ni  in  the  N.A.  pi.  n. 

In  the  u  declension  the  RV.  has  only  three  forms  following  the 
analogy  of  the  derivative  i  declension  :  isu  f.  arrow :  D.  isv-ai,  G.  isv- 
as,  su-vastv-as  of  the  (river)  Suvastu  (all  in  late  passages).^     There  are 


1 


1  The  only  stem  not  taking  Guna  is  ari  devout  which  has  the  N.  pi. 
ary-^s  m.  f. 

2  The  original  ending  ns  is  in  both  ^liein  and  m£dhiin  preserved 
in  the  Sandhi  forms  of  ms  or  mr  (39,  40). 

^  About  ten  stems  in  i  in  the  RV.  have  N.  pi,  forms  according  to 
the  derivative  i  declension  ;  e.  g.  avanis  streams  beside  avdnayas. 

*  The  normal  type  siici  (  =  suci-i)  is  of  about  the  same  frequency 
as  its  shortened  form  sdci,  both  together  occurring  about  fifty  times 
in  the  RV.     The  secondary  type  sucini  occurs  about  fourteen  times. 

"  There  is  only  one  example  of  the  N.  pi.  m.  without  Guna  :  mMhv-as 
itself  occurring  four  times. 

«  There  are  two  examples  of  the  N.  pi.  f.  without  Guna  :  md,dhv-as 
and  satd-kratv-as  having  a  hundred  powers. 

"^  The  typo  without  ending  is  made  from  twelve  stems,  the  form 
with  shortened  vowel  being  nearly  twice  as  common  as  that  with  u. 
The  secondary  type  m&dhuni  is  more  frequent  than  m^dhu. 

8  In  B.  the  D.  s.  f.  ending  ai  is  here  regularly  used  instead  of  the 
Ab.G.  as. 


98-99]  IRREGULAR   I   STEMS  83 

also  some  forms  following  the  analogy  of  the  u  declension  :  A.  d-bhirv- 
am  from  &-hh.im  fearless  and  N.  du.  and  pi.  in  yuv-a  and  yuv-as  fi'om 
several  stems  derived  with  the  suffix  yu.  Besides  the  numerous  I. 
singulars  m.  and  n.,  there  are  many  alternative  n.  forms,  in  the 
remaining  cases  of  the  s.  and  N.  A.  pi.,  following  the  n  declension : 
D.  madhu-ne,  kasipu-ne ;  Ab.  mMhu-nas,  sanu-nas  ;  Q.  caru-nas, 
daru-nas,  drii-nas,  mddhu-nas,  vd.su-nas  ;  L.  ayu-ni,  sanu-ni  ;  daru- 
ni ;  N.A.  pi,  darQ-ni,  &c. 

h.  There  is  no  example  of  a  V.  s.  n.  from  an  i  stem,  and  the  only  one 
from  an  u  stem  is  giiggulu  (AV.).  This  seems  to  indicate  that  the 
V.  s.  in  these  stems  was  identical  with  the  N. 

c.  Adjectives  in  u  often  use  this  stem  for  the  f.  also ;  e.  g.  caru  dear ; 
otherwise  they  form  the  f.  in  ii,  as  tanu  m.,  tanu  f.  thin  (Lat.  ienu-is); 
or  in  i,  as  uru  m.,  urv-i  f.  wide. 

d.  There  are  about  a  dozen  stems  in  which  final  i  seems  to  be  radical 
in  a  secondary  sense  as  representing  a  reduced  form  of  roots  ending  in 
a.  They  are  mostly  m.  compounds  formed  with  -dhi ;  e.g.  ni-dhi 
treasury.  There  are  also  about  eight  stems  formed  from  roots  in  u,  all 
of  which  except  dyii  day  are  final  mepabers  of  compounds ;  e.  g.  raghu- 
drvi  running  sioiftly  ;  besides  some  twelve  stems  in  which  u  is  radical  in 
a  secondary  sense,  as  representing  the  shortened  form  of  the  vowel  of 
three  roots  in  u  ;  e.g.  su-pu  clarifying  well  (from  t^xx.  purify),  pari-bhii 
surrounding  (from  bhui  he). 

The  inflexion  of  these  radical  i  and  u  stems  is  exactly  the  same  as 
that  of  the  derivative  i  and  u  stems  given  above. 

Irregularities. 

99.  1.  pati  (Gk.  Troo-^-y)  m.  Jmshancl  is  irregular  in  the 
D.G.L.  s. :  paty-e,  paty--ur,i  paty-au;  while  the  I.  in  this 
sense  has  the  normal  form  paty-a.  When  it  means  lord, 
either  as  a  simple  word  or  as  final  member  of  a  compound, 
it  is  regular  :  D.  patay-e,  brhas-patay-e,  G.  pate-s,  praja- 
pate-s,  L.  go-patau ;  while  the  I.  in  this  sense  is  formed 
with  na:  pati-na,  brhas-patina.  The  f.  is  patni  (Gk. 
TroTVLo)  toife  and  lady. 


^  The  anomalous  ending  appears  to  be  due  to  the  influence  of  the 
Ab.G.  in  the  names  of  relationship  (101)  in  r  like  pitiii',  G.  of  pitf 
father. 

g2 


84  DECLENSION  [99 

a.  The  f.  jd.ni  mfe  takes  the  anomalous  ending  ur  in  the  G. :  jdny-ui'.' 
It  has  the  further  anomaly  of  forming  its  N.  j£ni  like  the  derivative 
i  declension. 

2.  sakh-i  m.  friend,  besides  having  irregularities  like  pati 
in  the  weak  cases  of  the  s.,  has  a  strong  stem  formed  with 
Vrddhi :  N.  sakha,  A.  sakhay-am,  I.  sakhy-a,  D.  sakhy-e, 
Ab.G.  sakhy-ur,'  V.  sakhe.^  Du.  sakhay-a  and  sakhay-au  ; 
PL  N.  sakhay-as,  A.  sakhi-n,  1.  sakhi-bhis,  D.  sakhi-bhyas, 
G.  sakhi-n-am. 

ft.  In  the  RV.  sikhi  occurs  as  the  final  member  of  eight  compoiinds 
in  which  it  is  inflected  in  the  same  way  and  is  also  used  as  a  f.  ;  e.  g. 
marut-sakha.  N.  m.  f.  having  the  Maruts  as  friends. 

3.  ari  devout  is  irregular  in  forming  several  cases  like  the 
radical  i  stems  (except  in  accentuation) :  sing.  A.  ary-am 
(beside  ari-m)  m.,  G.  ary-as  m.  ;  j^l.  N.  ary-as  m.  f., 
A.  ary-as  m.  f, 

a.  The  VS.  lias  also  the  N.  s.  ari-s,  beside  the  regular  ari-s  of  the  RV. 
d.vi  s]iee2)  (Lat.  ovi-s)  also  takes  the  normal  ending  as  in  the  G.  s. : 
avy-as.     vi  m.  bird  has  in  the  RV.  the  N.  s.  ve-s  beside  vi-s. 

4.  The  neuters  aksi  ci/e,  asthi  hone,  dadhi  curds,  sakthi 
thigh,  form  their  weakest  cases  from  stems  in  an ;  e.  g. 
L  dadhn-a,  sakthn-a  ;  G.  aksn-as,  asthn-as,  dadhn-as. 
Du.N.  aksi-ni  (AV.),  I.  sakthi-bhyam,  G.  aksn-6s,  but 
sakthy-os  (VS.).  In  the  pi.  the  an  stems  are  used  in  the 
N.A.  also  :  aksan-i  (beside  aksi-ni,  AV.),  asthan-i  (beside 
asthi-ni,  AV.),  sakthan-i ;  I.  aksa-bhis,  astha-bhis ;  D. 
astha-bhyas. 

5.  dyu  m.  f.  ski/  (originally  diu,  weak  grade  of  dyo,  102,  3) 
retains  this  stem  before  consonant  terminations  (taking 
Vrddhi  in  the  N.V.  s.),  but  changes  it  to  div  before  vowels : 


^  Influenced,  like  pdtyur,  by  the  names  of  relationship  in  r  (101). 
2  Formed  regularly  like  siice  from  ^dci. 


99-100]  STEMS   IN   I   AND   U  85 

Sing.  N.   dyau-s  {Zev9  =  zljeu?).     A.  div-am.^     I.  div-a. 

D.  div-6.     Ab.G.  div-as  (JiFos).     L.  div-i  {AiFt)-     V. 

dyau-s'-  [Z^v). 
Pl.N.  diy-as.^     A.  m.  dyun/  f.  div-as.     I.  dyii-bhis.^ 

100.  C.  Stems  in  i  and  u  are  mostly  f.  when  substan- 
tives, but  a  great  many  as  final  members  of  compounds  are 
adjectives  used  in  the  m.  as  well  as  f. 

I.  The  1  stems  are  very  differently  inflected  according  as 
they  are  radical  (a)  or  derivative  {b).  The  analogy  of  the 
primary  radical  group  (1)  is  closely  followed  both  in 
inflexion  and  accentuation  by  a  secondary  group  (2)  of  about 
eighty  polysyllabic  stems  which,  though  formed  with 
derivative  i,  are  for  the  sake  of  clearness  best  treated  as 
a  division  of  the  radical  group. 

a.  The  normal  endings  as  they  appear  in  the  inflexion  of 
consonant  stems  are  taken  throughout  this  declension.  The 
G.  pi.,  however,  preserves  the  normal  ending  am  in  one 
single  form  only  (dhiy-am),  nam  being  otherwise  always 
added.  The  N.  s.  always  adds  s.  Accentuation  on  the 
final  syllable  of  the  stem  is  characteristic  of  this  declension, 
and,  except  in  monosyllabic  stems,  the  acute  remains  on 
that  syllable  throughout.  Before  vowel  endings  the  i  is 
split  to  iy  in  monosyllabic  nouns,  even  when  they  are  final 
members  of  compounds,''  as  A.  dhiy-am,  pi.  N.  nana-dhiy-as 
having  diverse  intentions ;  but  in  roots  as  final  members  of 


^  The  stem  div,  the  Samprasarana  form  of  dyav,  has  made  its  way 
into  the  strong  cases,  A.  s.  and  N.  pi.,  owing  to  the  very  frequent 
weak  cases  div-as,  &c.,  which  taken  together  occur  more  than  350  times 
in  the  KV. 

^  i.e.  diau-s  to  be  pronounced  as  a  disylhible.  The  s  of  tlie  N.  is 
retained  in  this  form. 

3  These  two  forms,  which  occur  only  in  the  RV.  or  passages  borrowed 
from  it,  always  mean  daijs. 

*  Except  accented  -dhf,  as  a-dhiam  (but  su-dhi  follows  the  general 
rule,  as  su-dhiy-as). 


86  DECLENSION  [100 

compounds  only  when  two  consonants  precede/  as  yajna- 
priy-am  sacrifice-loving,  but  yajna-nyam  (=  yajna-niam) 
leading  the  sacrifice.  Otherwise  i  is  always  written  as  y, 
but  is  invariably  to  be  pronounced  as  i,  as  nady-am  pro- 
nounced nadiam  -  stream. 

The  monosyllabic  stems  belonging  to  the  radical  class  are 
the  feminines  dht  thought,  hhifear,  sri  glory,  and  the  m.  vi 
receiver  (occurring  only  once  in  the  N.  s.).  The  compounds 
of  the  first  three,  being  mostly  Bahuvrlhis  (189),  and  the 
compounds  formed  from  the  roots  kri  huy,  ni  lead,  pri  love, 
mi  diminish,  vi  move,  si  lie,  sri  mix,  being  mostly  accusative 
Tatpurusas  (187),  are  both  m.  and  f. 

The  secondary  group  consists  of  more  than  eighty  poly- 
syllabic stems  accented  on  the  final  syllable  and  probably 
for  this  reason  following  the  analogy  of  the  radical  com- 
pounds. Excepting  about  half  a  dozen  they  are  substantives, 
nearly  all  f.  The  masculines  are  ahi  serpent,  rathi  charioteer, 
and  about  eight  compounds. 

&.  The  declension  in  derivative  i  embraces  a  large  number 
of  stems  formed  by  means  of  the  suffix  i  (originally  ya) 
largely  to  supply  a  f.  to  m.  words,  and  not  normally  accenting 
the  suffix.''  It  also  includes  a  large  number  of  miscellaneous 
f.  stems  of  an  independent  character  having  no  corresponding 
m.,   as  sac-i  might.     It  includes  seven  m.   stems,   five  of 


1  In  the  secondary  radical  group  (a  2,  p.  87)  the  i  is  split  only  in 
samudxi  and  partly  in  cakri. 

2  The  resolved  forms  given  below  are  spelt  with  i  (not  iy  as  they 
may  have  been  pronounced)  so  as  to  avoid  confusion  with  the  written 
forms  of  the  Samhita  text  that  are  spelt  with  iy.  Again  the  resolved 
vowel  is  given  as  i  (not  i)  because  long  vowels  are  regularly  shortened 
in  pronunciation  before  vowels  (p.  22,  notes  1  and  5). 

2  The  exceptions  are  mostly  stems  in  whicli  the  preceding  syllable, 
having  been  reduced,  throws  the  accent  forward,  e.g.  uru,  f.  urv-i, 
ivide ;  or  in  which,  as  proper  names,  the  accent  has  shifted  to  indicate 
a  change  of  moaning^  e.  g.  asikni  a  river,  but  ^sikni  black. 


100]       RADICAL   AND   DERIVATIVE   I  STEMS       87 

which  are  proper  names:    Tirasci,  Nami,  Prthi,  Matali, 
Sobhari,  besides  rastri  ruler,  siri  iveaver. 

The  inflexion  of  these  sterns^  differs  from  that  of  the 
radical  i  stems  in  three  respects : — (1)  no  s  is  added  in 
the  N.  s.  m.  or  f. ;  (2)  the  endings  diverge  considerably 
from  the  normal  ones,  the  s.  A.  taking  m,  the  D.  ai,  the 
Ab.G.  as,  the  L.  am,  the  pi.  N.V.A.  s ;  (3)  stems  accented 
on  the  final  vowel  shift  the  acute  to  the  ending  in  the  weak 
cases  of  the  s.,  in  the  G.L.  du.,  and  in  the  G.  pi. 

a.  Radical  Stems.  h.  Derivative  Stems. 

1.  dhi  f.  tJtaugM.     2.  rathi  m.  f.  devi  f.  goddess. 

charioteer. 


Singular. 

N. 

dhi-s 

rathi-s 

devi 

A. 

dhiy-am 

rathi- am 

devi-m 

I. 
D. 

dhiy-a 
dhiy-e 

rathi-a 
rathi-e 

devy-a 
devy-ai 

G. 

dhiy-as 

rathi-as 

Ab.G. 

devy-as 

V. 

rathi 
Dual. 

L. 
V. 

devy-am 
d6vi 

N.A. 

dhiy-a,  -au 

rathi-a 

N.A. 
V. 

devi 
d6vi 

I. 
G.L. 

dhi-bhyam 
dhiy-6s 

rathi-bhyam 
rathi-os 

D.Ab. 

devi-bhyam 
devy-6s 

1  In  the  later  language  the  derivative  group  (h)  absorbs  the  second- 
ary radical  group  (a  2),  while  borrowing  from  the  latter  the  N.A.V. 
du.  and  the  N.V.  pi.  forms. 


N. 

dhiy-as 

rathi-as 

A. 

dhiy-as 

rathi-as 

I. 

dhi-bhis 

rathi-bhis 

D. 

rathi-bhyas 

G. 

dJii-n-am  ^ 

G. 

rathi-n-am 

L. 

dhi-su 

L. 

ratM-su 

88  DECLENSION  [lOO 

Plural. 

devi-s 
devi-s 
devi-bhis 
devi-bhyas 
devi-n-am 
devi-su 
V.  d6vi-s 

a.  Other  words  belonging  to  the  secondary  radicial  class  (a  2)  are  : 
kumari  girl  (A.  kumariam),  tandri  weariness  (N.  tandris),  duti  mes- 
senger (N.  dutis),  nadi  siream  (A.  nadiam),  laksmi  mark  (N.  laksmis, 
A.  laksmiam),  simhi  lio7iess  (N.  simhis,  A.  simUam). 

B.  stri  woman,  originally  a  disyllable,  is  inflected  as  a  radical 
monosyllabic  stem  in  the  sing.  A.  and  pi.  N.A.I.  :  striy-am  ;  striy-as, 
stri-bhis  (accent);  but  retains  traces  of  its  derivative  origin  in  the  s. 
N.  stri  (no  s),  D,  striy-di"  (AV.),  G-  striy-as,  L.  striy-am  (AV.). 

II.  The  u  declension,  which  comprises  both  radical  and 
derivative  stems,  is  much  more  homogeneous  than  the 
i  declension.  The  inflexion  of  these  two  classes  corresponds 
exactly  to  that  of  the  two  divisions  of  the  radical  i  declension. 
Practically  all  the  .stems  in  this  declension  are  oxytones 
(including  both  the  compound  radical  and  the  derivative 
stems). 

a.  In  the  radical  class  there  are  seven  monosyllabic 
stems,  five  of  which  are  f. :  du  gift,  bhu  earth,  bru  hroiv, 
syu  thread,  sru  stream ;  one  m.  and  f.  :  su  begetter  and 
mother ;  one  m. :  ju  speeding,  steed.  There  are  further  two 
reduplicated  f.  substantives  and  one  adjective :  juhu  tongue, 
juhvL  sacrificial  spoon ;  jogu  singing  aloud.  Finally,  there 
are  about  sixty  compounds,  almost  exclusively  formed  from 
about  eleven  roots,  e.  g.  pari-bhu  surrounding. 


»  dW-n-am  occurs  seven  times  in  the  RV.,  dhiy-am  only  once,  the 
latter  being  the  only  example  of  the  normal  ending. 

2  In  B.  this  form  is  used  for  the  G. ;  e.  g.  striyai  payah  woman's 

milk. 


100]       RADICAL   AND   DERIVATIVE   U  STEMS      89 

h.  The  derivative  class  comprises  two  divisions :  the  one 

consists  of  about  eighteen  oxytone  f.  substantives,  several 

of  which  correspond  to  ni,  or  n.  stems  in  u  accented  on  the 

first  syllable,  e.  g.  a-grii  (m.  a-gru)  maid  ;    the  other  and 

more  numerous  division  consists  of   oxytone   f.   adjectives 

corresponding  to  m,   oxytones,   e.  g.  babhrii  (m.   babhrti) 

hroivn. 

a.  The  normal  endings  as  they  appear  in  the  inflexion  of  consonant 
stems  are  taken  throughout  this  declension  (radical  and  derivative).^ 
The  Gr.  p].,  however,  takes  the  normal  am  in  uncompounded  radical 
stems  only,^  but  nam  in  all  others.  The  N.  s.  always  adds  s.  Before 
vowel  endings  the  u  is  split  into  uv  in  monosyllabic  nouns  and 
generally  in  compounds  with  roots  as  final  member  (even  when  pre- 
ceded by  a  single  consonant).  In  the  minority  of  such  compounds 
(some  nine  in  the  RV.)  and  in  all  derivative  stems,*  it  is  written  as  v, 
but  pronounced  as  u.*  Thus  A.  bhuv-am,  a-bhuv-am  present ;  but 
vi-bhii-am  eminent,  tanu-am. 

The  forms  occurring  if  made  from  bhu  earth  and  tanu 
hocly  would  be  the  following : 

Singular. 

radical.  derivative. 

N.  bhu-s  tanu-s 

A.  bhuv-am  tanu-am 

I.  bhuv-a  tanu-a 

D.  tanu-e 
Ab.G.  bhuv-as  Ab.G.   tanu-as 

L.  bhuv-i  /tanu-i 

■  I  tanu 
V.   tanu 

1  The  derivative  stems  show  an  incipient  tendency  to  be  influenced 
by  the  inflexion  of  the  derivative  i  declension.  The  RV.  has  only  one 
such  form  :  svasruam ;  the  AV.  has  at  least  ten  such ;  the  VS.  has 
A.  pumscalu-m  courtesan,  D.  tanv-di,  G.  tanv-as.  In  B.  the  D.  s.  f. 
ending  ai  is  used  for  as  ;  e.  g.  dhenvd,i  retah  the  seed  of  the  coiv. 

-  Judging  by  the  only  two  forms  that  occur,  bhuvam  and  joguvam. 

2  It  is,  however,  split  in  the  derivative  stems  a-grii,  kadrd  Soma 
vessel,  in  adjectives  when  u  is  preceded  by  y,  and  in  bibhatsii  loathiwj, 

*  Hence  in  such  forms  it  is  given  below  as  u  (short  because  a  vowel 
is  shortened  before  another  in  pronunciation  ;  cp.  p.  22,  note  1). 


90 


DECLENSION 


[100-101 


Dual. 


N.A.  bhuv-a 
I.  bhii-bhyam 
L.  bhuv-6s 


N.A.  tanii-a 
D,  tanu-bhyam 
L.  tanu-os 


Plural. 


N.  bhuv-as 
A.  bhuv-as 

G.  bhuv-am 


N.  tanu-as 
A.  tanu-as 
I.  tanu-bhis 
D.  tanu-bhyas 
G.  tanu-n-am 


101.  D.  Stems  in  r  (m.  and  f.),  which  in  origin  are 
consonant  stems  in  derivative  ar  or  tar,  closely  resemble 
an  stems  (90)  in  their  declension.  Derivative  stems  in  r 
consist  of  two  groups,  the  one  formed  with  the  original 
suffix  ar,  the  other  with  tar.  The  former  is  a  small  group 
of  only  eight  stems,  the  latter  a  very  large  one  of  more 
than  150.  Both  groups  agree  in  distinguishing  strong 
and  weak  cases.  The  strong  stem  ends  in  ar  or  ar, 
which  in  the  weak  forms  is  reduced  to  r  before  vowels  and 
r  before  consonants.  Both  groups  further  agree  in  dropping 
the  final  of  the  stem  in  the  N.  s.  m.  f.,  which  case  always 
ends  in  a.  They  resemble  the  vowel  declension  in  adding 
the  ending  n  in  the  A.  pi.  m.  and  s  in  the  A.  j)l.  f.,^  and  in 
inserting  n  before  the  am  of  the  G.  pl.'^  They  have  the 
peculiar  ending  ur  in  the  G.  s.^ 

1.   The  stems  in   ar   are:    m.    dev-r   husband's  brother, 


nr ' 


man 


sister ;  n.  ah-ar  cla/j,  udh-ar  udder,  vadh-ar  iveapon,  which 

1  Except  usr-d,s. 

^  Except  sv^sr-am  and  n^r-am. 

■•  Except  n^r-as  and  usr-ds. 

*  This  word  is  probably  derived  with  the  suffix  ar. 

^  In  this  word  the  r  is  probably  radical  :  svd-sar. 


f.  us-f  dmvn,  nanandr  husband's  sister,  svasr^       | 


101]  STEMS   IN   Tl  AND  Til  '91 

occur  in  the  N.A,  s.  only.^  The  forms  that  occur  of  the 
first  five  stems  are  : 

a.  Sing.  A.  devar-am.     PI.  N.  devar-as.     L.  devr-su. 

&.  Sing.  A.  nar-am  {d-vep-a).  D.  nar-e.  G.  nar-as. 
L.  nar-i  (Ep.  Gk.  d-vep-L).  Du.  N.A.  nar-a.  V.  nar-a  and 
nar-au.  PI.  N.V.  nar-as  (Ep.  Gk.  d-vep-es).  A.  nr-n. 
I.  nr-bhis.  D.A.  nr-bhyas.  G.  nar-am  and  nr-n-am.^ 
L.  nf-su. 

c.  Sing.  G.  usr-as.  L.  usr-i  and  usr-am.^  V.  usar. 
PI.  A.  usr-as. 

d.  Sing.  G.  nanandur.     L.  nanandari. 

e.  Sing.  N.  svasa.  A.  svasar-am.  I.  svasr-a.  D.  svasr-e. 
Ab.G.  svas-ur.  Du.  svasar-a,  -au.  L.  svasr-os.  PI.  N. 
svasar-as.  A.  svasr-s.  I.  svasr-bhis.  G.  svasr-am*  and 
svasf-n-am. 

2.  This  group  includes  two  subdivisions,  the  one  forming 
its  strong  stem  in  tar,  the  other  in  tar  (Gk.  -rrjp,  -rcop, 
Lat.  -tor).  The  former  consists  of  a  small  class  of  five 
names  of  relationship :  three  m.,  pi-tar  father,  bhra-tar 
brother,  nap-tar  grandson,  and  two  f.,  duh-i-tar  daughter 
and  ma-tar  mother,  together  with  the  m.  and  f.  compounds 
formed  from  them.  The  second  division  consists  of  more 
than  150  stems  (including  compounds)  which  are  either 
agent  nouns  accented  chiefly  on  the  suffix,  or  participles 
accented  chiefly  on  the  root.  These  stems  are  never  f.,  and 
only  four  are  n. 

In  the  tr  declension  three  stems  are  to  be  distinguished  :  the  strong, 
tar  or  tar  ;  the  middle,  tr  ;  and  the  weakest,  tr.  The  names  of  rela- 
tionship take  the  Guna  form,^  agent  nouns  the  Vrddhi  form  of  the 

1  d,h-ar  and  udh-ar  form  their  other  cases  from  the  an  stems  ah-an 
and  udh-an.     Cp.  91.  6.  ^  often  to  be  pronounced  nfnam. 

^  Following  the  analogy  of  the  derivative  i  declension. 

*  svdsr-am  and  nar-am  are  the  only  two  forms  of  the  r  declension 
in  which  am  is  added  direct  to  the  stem. 

5  The  strong  stem  n^p-tar  does  not  occur  in  the  RV.,  napat  taking 
its  place. 


92 


DECLENSION 


[101 


strong  stem.  The  inflexion  of  the  m.  and  f.  differs  in  the  A.  pi.  only. 
The  sing.  G.  is  formed  in  ur,  the  L.  in  ari,  the  V.  in  ar  ;  the  pi.  A. 
m.  in  tf n,  f.  tfs,  Ct.  in  tfnam. 

The  inflexion  of  the  thi*ee  stems  da-t^  m.  giver  [Soy-T-qp, 
da-tor),  pi-tr  ni.  father  {ira-Trjp,  pd-ter),  ma-tr  f.  mother 
{jirj-Tr^p,  ma-ter)  is  as  follows : 


Singular. 


N.  data 

A.  datar-am 


I.  datr-a 
D.  datr-6 
Ab.G.  datur 
L.  datar-i 
V.  datar  [ScoTep] 


pita 
pitar-am 


pitr-a 

pitiir 

pitar-i  {Trarep-i) 

pitar  {Ju-jjiter) 

Dual. 


mata 
matar-am 


matr-a 
inatr-6 
matur 
matar-i 
matar  {fifJTep) 


N.A.  datar-a,  -au 


G.L.  datr-6s 


N. 

datar- as         i 

A. 

datrn 

I. 
D.Ab. 

datr-bhis 
datr-bhyas 

G. 

datr-n-am 

i        ^' 

datr-su 

V.  datar-as 


pitar-a,  -au 


I.D.  datf-bhyam  pitf-bhyam 


pitr-6s 
Plural. 


pitar-as 


pitfn 


pitr-bhis 
pitr-bhyas 


pitf-n-am 

pitr-su 

pitar-as 


matar-a,  -au 


matr-bhyam 


matr-6s 


matar-as 


matr-s 


matr-n-am 


matf-su 


matar-as 


matr-bhis 
matr-bhyas 


101-102]  STEMS   IN   DIPHTHONGS  93 

a.  nfip-tr  in  the  RV.  occurs  in  the  weak  stem  only  :  Sing.  I.  ndptr-a, 
D.  n£ptr-e,  G.  ndpt-ur.  PI.  I.  n^ptr-bhis.  It  is  sup23lemented  in  tho 
strong  forms  by  n£pat  (Lat.  nepot-):  Sing.  N.V.  n^pat.  A.  napat-am. — 
Du.  N.A.  nd.pat-a. — PI.  N.V.  n^pat-as.  In  the  TS.  occurs  nSptar-am 
(like  svdsar-am  among  the  r  stems). 

b.  The  only  n.  stems  occurring  are  dhar-tf  prop,  dhma-tf  smithy, 
stha-tf  staiionarij,  vi-dhar-tf  meting  out,  and  of  these  only  about  half  a 
dozen  forms  occur.  The  only  oblique  cases  met  with  are  the  Gr.  sthatiir 
and  the  L.  dhmatd,ri.  The  N.A.  s.  owing  to  its  rarity  seems  never  to 
have  acquired  fixity  in  the  Veda,  but  sthatfir  represents  the  normal 
form.  In  B.  the  N.A.  form  in  r  begins  to  be  used  in  an  adjectival 
sense  :  bhartf  sitpporting,  janayitf  creative. 

c.  The  f.  of  agent  nouns  in  tr  is  foi-med  with  I  from  the  weak  stem 
of  the  m,,  e.  g.  janitr-i  mother  (inflected  like  devf), 

102.  E.  Stems  in  ai,  o,  au.  The  only  stems  in 
diphthongs  are:  rai  m.  and  (rarely)  f.  tvealtli,  go  m.  hull, 
f.  coio,  dyo  m.  f.  sky,  nau  f.  ship,  glau  m.  f.  lump.  They 
form  a  transition  from  the  consonant  to  the  vowel  declension  ; 
for  while  they  take  the  normal  endings  like  the  ordinary 
consonant  declension,  they  add  s  in  the  N.  s.  m.  f.  and 
have  a  vowel  before  the  endings  with  initial  consonant. 
There  are  no  neuter  forms. 

1.  rai  appears  as  ray  before  vowels  and  ra  before  con- 
sonants. The  forms  occurring  are :  Sing.  A.  ra-m  (Lat. 
re-m).  I.  ray-a.  D.  ray-6  (Lat.  rc-l).  Ab.G.  ray-as. — 
PI.  N.  ray-as.     A.  ray-as.^     G.  ray-am. 

2.  go  has  as  its  strong  form  gau  which  appears  as  ga  in 
the  A.  s.  and  pi.  The  Ab.G.  are  irregular  in  adding  s  onlj^ 
instead  of  as.^  The  forms  occurring  are :  Sing.  N.  gau-s 
{^ov-s).  A.  ga-m  (/Sco-i^j.  I.  gav-a.  D.  gav-e.  Ab.G.  go-s. 
L.  gav-i. — Du.  gav-a,  -au. — PI.  N.  gav-as.  A.  ga-s. 
I,  go-bhis.  D.  go-bhyas.  G.  gav-am  and  go-n-am.'' 
L.  go-su.     V.  gav-as. 

1  Rarely  ray-as ;  once  ra-s  (SV.). 

2  As  regards  accentuation  this  word  is  not  treated  as  a  monosyllabic 
stem,  never  shifting  the  accent  to  the  endings. 

3  This  form,  which  follows  the  vowel  declension  and  is  much  less 
common  than  gdv-am,  occurs  at  the  end  of  a  Pada  only. 


94  DECLENSION  [102-103 

3.  dyo  m.  f.  sJcp  (cp.  99.  5)  is  declined  like  go.  The 
forms  occurring  are  :  Sing.  N.  dyau-s  ^  {Zev^)-  A.  dyam 
(Lat.  diem).  Ab.G.  dyo-s.  L.  dyav-i.  V.  dyau-s  and 
dyau-s-  (Zev). — Du.  N.A.  dyav-a. — PI.  N.V.  dyav-as. 

4.  nau  is  inflected  quite  regularly  as  far  as  can  be  judged 
by  the  fesv  forms  occurring :  Sing.  N.  nau-s  (i/aC-?). 
N.  nav-am  {vfjFa).  I.  nav-a.  G.  nav-as  [vrjf-6'i).  L.  nav-i 
{vrjf-i). — PI.  N.  nav-as  {vrjf-e^,  ndv-es).  A.  nav-as  {yr]f-as). 
I.  nau-bhis  {vav-^i). 

5.  glau  occurs  in  two  forms  only:  Sing.  N.  glau-s  and 
PI.  I.  glau-bhis.^ 


Degrees  of  Comparison. 

103.  1.  The  secondary  suffixes  of  the  comparative 
tara^  (Gk.  -repo)  and  the  superlative  tama  (Lat.  -timo)  are 
regularly  added  to  nominal  stems  (both  simple  and  com- 
pound), substantives  as  well  as  adjectives,  generally  to  the 
weak  or  middle  stem  ;  e.  g.  priya-tara  dearer,  tavas-tara 
stronger,  vapus-tara  more  wonderful,  bhagavat-tara  more 
bounteous ;  vrtra-tara  a  worse  Vrtra ;  bhuri-davat-tara 
giving  more  abundantly ;  sasvat-tama  most  constant ;  ratna- 
dha-tama  best  bestower  of  treasure  ;  hiranya-vasi-mat-tama 
best  wielder  of  the  golden  axe  ;  rathi-tama  best  cJiarioteer. 

a.  The  final  n  of  the  stem  is  i-etained  before  these  sufiSxes  ;  e.  g. 
madin-tara  more  gladdening,  vrsan-tama  most  manly.  An  n  is  some- 
times even  inserted  ;  e.  g.  surabhi-n-tara  more  fragrant ;  rayin-tama 
veri/  rich. 


1  The  same  as  the  N.  of  dyu  (99.  5). 

2  That  is,  diau-s  with  the  proper  V.  accent,  but  with   anomalous 
retention  of  the  N.  s. 

^  The  N.  pi.  glav-as  also  occurs  in  the  AB. 

*  These  secondary  comparatives  and  superlatives  are  commoner  than 
the  primary  in  the  j^roportion  of  thi*ee  to  two. 


103]         COMPARATIVE   AND   SUPERLATIVE  95 

h.  In  a  few  instances  the  strong  stem  of  a  present  participle  is  used ; 
e.  g.  vradhan-tama  being  most  mighUj,  sahan-tama  most  victorious ;  and 
the  weakest  stem  of  a  perfect  participle  :  vidiis-tara  mser ;  milhus- 
tama  most  gracious. 

c.  These  secondary  suffixes  are  occasionally  found  added  to  the 
primary  comparatives  and  superlatives,  e.  g.  sr6stha-tania  most 
beautiful. 

d.  They  also  form  a  comparative  and  superlative  from  the  preposi- 
tion ud  up  :  ut-tara  higher,  ut-tamd,i  highest. 

e.  These  suffixes  ^  form  their  f.  in  a ;  e.  g.  matf-tama  most  motherly. 

2.  The  primary  suffix  of  the  comparative  iyams  (Gk.  -lo^v, 
Lat.  -ior)  and  that  of  the  superlative  istha  (Gk.  -laro)  are 
added  directly  to  the  root,  which  is  regularly  accented '  and 
gunates  i  and  u,  but  leaves  a  unchanged  apart  from 
nasalization  in  a  few  instances.  Final  radical  a  combines 
with  the  initial  of  the  suffix  to  e,  which  is,  however,  usually 
to  be  read  as  two  syllal)les.  Examples  are :  t6j-iyams 
sJiarper,  t6j-istha  veri/  sliarp  (tij  he  sharp) ;  jav-iyams  quieher, 
jav-istha  qiikJcest  (ju  he  sioift) ;  yaj-iyams  sacrificing  hctter, 
yaj -istha  sacrificing  hest ;  mamh-istha  most  liberal  (mah 
bestow  ahundantly) ;  jy^stha  greatest  and  jyestha  eldest  (jya 
overcome). 

a.  In  many  instances  these  superlatives  attach  themselves  in  mean- 
ing to  derivative  adjectives,  being  formed  from  the  root  which  the 
latter  contain  ;  e.  g.  to-iyams  smaller,  to-istha  smallest  beside  an-u 
minute  ;  dav-iyams/a/Z/icr  beside  dii-ra/a?- ;  dragh-iyams  longer,  dragh- 
istha  longest  beside  dirgh-d  long  ;  lagh-iyams  lighter  beside  lagh-ii  light; 
var-iyams  wider,  var-istha  loidest  beside  ur-ii  loide  ;  ^ds-iyams  more  fre- 
quent beside  sas-vant  constant ;  6s-istha  very  quick  beside  6s-am  quickly  ; 
bSrh-istha  very  lofty  beside  brh-dnt  great;  y^v -istha  youngest  beside 
ydv-an  youth  ;  v^r-istha  most  excellent  beside  var-a  choice ;  sadh-istha 
siraightest  beside  sadh-ii  straight. 


1  With  the  accent  of  the  ordinal  suffix  tamfi. 

2  When  used  as  an  ordinal  suffix  tama  forms  its  f.  in  accented  i 
(cp.  107j. 

^  Except  jyestha  meaning  eldest  and  kanistha  meaning  youngest. 


9.6  DECLENSION  [103 

13.  In  a  few  examples  the  suffix  is  added  to  tlie  derivative  form  of 
the  root  which  appears  in  the  adjective  ;  thus  as-istha  (ui/f-iffTo-s)  beside 
as-u  (wK-v-s)  sioift  (from  as  reach) ;  tiksn-iyams  sharper  beside  tiksna 
sharp  (from  tij  he  sharp) ;  n^v-iyams  neicer,  nav-istha  netvest  beside  u^va 
neui  ;  svad-Iyams  {tjS'lwv,  suuv-ior)  sweeter,  svad-istha  (t^S-io-to-s)  beside 
svad-li  {rjh-v-s,  suav-i-s)  sweet  (from  svad  be  sweet).''- 

a.  Beside  the  usual  forms  in  iyams  there  occur  about 
half  a  dozen  alternative  comparatives  made  with  the  shorter 
form  of  the  suffix,  yams  :  tav-yams  (tav-iyams)  stronger ; 
nav-yams  (nav-iyam-s)  newer ;  pan-yams  (pan-iyams) 
more  tvonderful,  bhu-yams^  (bhav-iyams)  becoming  more, 
greater;  rabh-yams  (rabh-iyams)  more  violent;  sah-yams 
(sah-iyams)  stronger.  Some  half-dozen  more  have  no 
alternative  form  beside  them:  jya-yams  greater,  older; 
pre-yams  dearer,  pr^-stha  dearest  (priya  dear)  ;  vas-yams 
better,  vas-istha  best  (vasu  good) ;  sr6-yams  {Kpdcov)  Utter, 
sr6-stha  best  (sri  be  bright),  san-yams  (Lat.  sen-ior)  older 
(sana  old),  sthe-yams  most  steadfast  (sthi-ra  firm). 

h.  Some  comparatives  and  superlatives  belong  to  their 
positives  in  sense  only;  e.g.  kan-iyams "  lesser,  tjounger, 
kan-istha  smallest  *  and  kan-istha  youngest  (alpa  small) ; 
n6d-iyams  (Av.  nazd-yali)  nearer,  n6d-istha  (Av.  nazd- 
ista)  nearest  (antika  near),  vars-iyams  higher,  vars-istha^ 
highest  (vrddha  groivn  up). 


1  From  the  adj.  pap^  had,i\\e  radical  element  of  which  is  uncertain, 
is  formed  direct  the  comparative  pap-iyams  in  the  TS. 

2  Here  the  vowel  remains  unchanged.  This  is  also  the  case  in  the 
corresponding  superlative  bhu-y-istha,  which  moreover  adds  the  suffix 
with  an  intervening  y. 

^  Cp,  kan-ya  girl{=  kania),  Gk.  /catvo-y  (=  Kavio-s). 

*  Appears  in  this  sense  in  the  TS. 

^  Cp.  vars-man  n.,  vars-mdn  m.  height. 


104]                                CARDINALS 

97 

Numerals. 

104.                               Cardinals. 

1.  6-ka. 

19. 

nava-dasa. 

2.  dva  {Svo,  Lat.  duo). 

20. 

vimsati  ^      (Lat. 

3.  ti'i  {rpi,  Lat.  tri). 

viginti). 

4.  catur  (Lat.  quatuor). 

30. 

trim-sat. 

5.  panca  (Trerre). 

40. 

catvarim-sat.^ 

6.  sas  (e^,  Lat.  sex). 

50. 

panea-sat    {rrev- 

7.  sapta  {iiTTd). 

rrj-KOVTo). 

8.  asta'    (6/crc6,    Lat.    odd, 

60. 

sas-ti.i° 

•       •     • 

Gothic  ahtaii). 

70. 

sapta-ti. 

9.  nava  (Lat.  novem). 

80. 

asi-ti." 

10.  dasa2(5e/ca). 

90. 

nava-ti. 

11.  6ka-dasa.^ 

100. 

satam    [k-Karov, 

12.  dva-dasa^  {Sa>-SeKa). 

Lat.  centum). 

13.  trayo-dasa.^ 

1,000. 

sahasra  n. 

14.  catur-dasa.® 

10,000. 

a-yiita  n. 

15.  panca-dasa. 

100,000. 

ni-yiita  n. 

16.  s6-dasa.^ 

•           • 

1,000,000. 

pra-yiita  n. 

17.  sapta-dasa. 

10,000,000. 

arbuda  n. 

18.  asta-dasa.^ 

100,000,000. 

nyarbuda  n. 

^  asta  is  an  old  dual  form. 

2  The  cardinals  between  10  and  20  are  Dvandya  compounds  formed 
by  prefixing  the  accented  unit  to  da^a  ten. 

^  Here  6ka  stands  for  6ka  under  the  influence  of  dva-dasa. 

*  Here  the  N.  du.  is  retained  instead  of  the  stem  form  dva. 

s  tr^o,  for  trfiyas  (45.  2),  is  the  N.  pi.  (105). 

•5  catur  as  first  member  of  a  compound  is  regularly  accented  cStur-. 

"^  For  sas-daiia  through  saz-dasa  (cp.  69  c,  note  3). 

^  This  and  the  remaining  cardinals  are  substantives.  Those  from 
tioenty  to  ninehj  are  either  old  compounds  (adj.  and  substantive :  two 
decades,  &c.)  or  derivatives  formed  with  -ti. 

^  catvarim  for  catvari,  n.  pi.  (105),  like  vim^ati  and  trimsSt. 
1"  Sixtij  to  ninety  are   abstract   f.  nouns   derived   from    the    simple 
cardinals  (except  asi-ti)  meaning  hexad  of  tens,  &c. 

^^  ail-  is  radically  cognate  to  as-ta. 
1819  n 


98  DECLENSION  [104-105 

a.  The  numbers  intermediate  between  the  decades  20-100 
are  Dvandva  compounds  formed  by  prefixing  the  accented 
unit  to  the  decade  ;  e.  g.  asta-vimsati  28  ;  6ka-trimsat  31  ; 
trayas-trimsat  33  ;  nava-catvarimsat  49  ;  nava-sasti  69  ; 
navasiti  89  ;  panca-navati  95,  san-navati  96,  asta-navati 
98  ;  6ka-satani  101,  catuh-satam  104,  trimsac-chatam  130. 

a.  Intermediate  numbers  may  also  be  expressed  by  adding  together 
unit  and  decade  with  or  without  ca  ;  e.g.  nava  ea  navatim  ea  nineiy  and 
nine,  navatim  nava  ninety-nine. 

P.  In  the  TS.  the  number  preceding  a  decade  is  also  expressed  by 
§kan  nd,  by  one  not  =  minus  one  ;  thus  ekan  na  vim^ati  twenty  less  one 
=  19  ;  ekan  n^  catvarimsat  39 ;  ekau  ni.  sasti  59  ;  6kan  nasiti  79 ; 
6kan  ni,  sat^m  99. 

h.  There  are  two  ways  of  forming  multiples.  The  larger 
number  in  the  du.  or  pi.  may  be  multiplied  by  the  smaller 
used  as  an  adjective  ;  e.  g.  dv6  sat6  200 ;  sastim  sahasra 
60,000  ;  trini  sata  tri  sahasrani  trimsac  ca  nava  ca  3,339. 
Otherwise  the  multiplier  prefixed  to  the  larger  number 
foi'ms  with  it  a  possessive  (adjective)  compound  accented  on 
the  last  syllable  ;  e.  g.  trayastrimsat  tri-satah  sat-sahasrah 
6,338. 

a.  Multiples  of  numbers  below  100  are  sometimes  formed  in  these  two 
ways  ;  e.g.  navatir  nava  nine  nineties  =  810  ;  tri-saptd  21,  tri-nav^  27. 


Declension  of  Cardinals. 

105 .  Only  the  first  four  cardinals,  like  other  adjectives, 
distinguish  the  genders.  6ka  one,  while  inflected  chiefly  in 
the  s.,  forms  a  pl.^  also  in  the  sense  of  some  ;  dva  two  is  of 
course  inflected  in  the  dual  only. 

1.  6ka  is  declined  like  the  pronominal  adjectives  visva 


*  A  N.  f.  du,  form  of  6ka  in  the  sense  of  a  certain  appears  in  6ke 
yuvati  (AV.)  a  cei'tain  pair  of  maidens. 


105]  CARDINALS  99 

and  sarva '  (120  b).     The  forms  occurring  in  the  Samhitas 
are : 

m.   s.    N.   6kas.     A.   6kam.      I.   6kena.     G.    6kasya.     L. 

6kasmin.     PI.  N.  6ke.     D.  6kebhyas. 
f.  s.  N.  6ka.     A.  6kam.     I.  6kaya.     G.  6kasyas.     PI.  N. 

6kas. 
n.  s.  N.  6kam.     PI.  N.  eka. 

2.  dva  tivo  is  declined  quite  regularly  as  a  dual,  like 
priya  (97  A.  1).     The  forms  occurring  are  : 

m.  N.  dva,^  dvau.  I,  dvabhyam.  G.  dvayos.  L.  dvayos. 
f.  N.  dv6.  I.  dvabhyam. 
n.  N.  dv6.  L.  dvayos. 

3.  tri  three  is  declined  in  the  m.  n.  pi.  quite  regularly,  like 
suci  (98  B).  The  f.  stem  is  tisr,^  the  inflexion  of  which 
differs  in  the  N.A.  from  other  r  stems*  by  adding  the 
normal  ending  as  to  the  unmodified  stem.  The  forms 
occurring  are  : 

m.  PI.  trayas.     A.  trin.     I.  tribhis.      D.  tribhyas.     G. 

trinam.     L.  trisu. 
f.  N.  tisras.     A.  tisras.     I.  tisi'bhis.     D.  tisrbhyas.     G. 

tisfnam.^ 
n.  N.A.  tri,  trini. 

4.  catiir  four  in  the  m.  n.  has  the  strong  stem  catvar 
(cp.  Lat.  quatiior).     In  the  G.  pi.,  though  the  stem  ends  in 


1  The  only  form  of  the  Ab.  s.  occurring,  6kat,  follows  the  nominal 
declension  ;  it  is  used  in  forming  compound  numerals,  6kan  na  trim- 
sat  29,  &c.  (TS.);  6kasmat,  used  in  the  same  way,  occurs  in  a  B.  jias- 
sage  of  the  TS. 

2  The  dual  form  is  retained  in  the  numeral  compound  dva-dasa  12. 
Otherwise  dvi  is  used  as  the  stem  in  compounds,  as  dvi-p^d  hq^ed,  and 
in  derivation,  as  dvf-dha  in  two  ways,  Sic. 

'  Probably  for  tri-sf,  formed  like  sva-sr  (101.  1,  note  5). 

*  Except  nar-ds  (101.  1  c). 

^  Once  written  tisrnam,  though  the  r  is  actually  long  metrically. 

h2  ' 


100  DECLENSION  [105-106 

a  consonant,  n  is  inserted  before  the  case-ending.^  The 
f.  stem  is  catasr,  which  is  inflected  exactly  like  tisr  and 
shifts  its  accent  like  panca.     The  forms  occurring  are : 

m.  N.  catvar-as.     A.  catur-as.     I.  catur-bhis.     D.  catur- 

bhyas.     G.  catur-nam.^ 
f.  N.  A.  catasr-as.     I.  catasr-bhis.     D.  catasr-bhyas.     G. 

catasrnam. 
n.  N.A.  catvar-i. 

106.  The  cardinals  from  five  to  nineteen,  though  used 
adjectivally,  do  not  distinguish  gender  and  take  no  ending 
in  the  N.A.'  They  also  have  in  common  the  peculiarity 
of  accenting  a  before  the  consonant  terminations  *  and  the 
final  syllable  in  the  G. 

a.  The  forms  of  sas  six  occurring  in  the  Sanihitas  are  : 
N.A.  sat  (27).     I.  sad-bhis.     D.  sad-bhyas.     L.  sat-sii. 

6.  The  forms  of  asta  eiglit  indicate  that  it  was  an  old 
dual.^     The  forms  that  occur  are  : 

N.A.  asta/' astau.    I.  asta-bhis.   D.  asta-bhyas.    L.  asta-su. 

c.  panca  five  as  well  as  sapta  seven  and  the  cardinals 
from  nine  to  nineteen  are  declined  like  neuters  in  an  (90.  2) 
except  in  the  G.,  which  follows  priya  (97).  The  forms 
occurring  are  : 

N.A.  panca.     I.  paiica-bhis.     D.  panea-bhyas.     G.  pan- 
canam.     L.  panca-su. 


1  Like  san-nam,  the  G.  of  sds,  which,  however,  does  not  seem  to 
occur  in  any  of  the  Samhitas. 

2  With  accent  on  the  final  syllable  like  the  G.  of  pdnca,  &c. 
^  Except  asta  and  ast&u  which  are  N.  A.  dual  forms. 

■*  Except  asta,  which  accents  the  terminations. 

^  Meaning  probably  the  two  tetrads  (perhaps  with  reference  to  the 
fingers  of  the  two  hands). 

*>  asta  is  the  stem  used  as  the  first  member  of  compounds  in  the 
RV.,  but  asta  begins  to  be  used  in  the  AV. 


106-107]     SYNTAX  OF  CARDINALS.     ORDINALS     101 

N.A.    sapta,      I.  sapta-bhis.      D.Ab.    sapta-bhyas.       G. 

saptanam. 
N.A.  nava.     I.  nava-bhis.    D.  nava-bhyas.    G.  navanam. 
N.A.  dasa.     I.  dasa-bhis.     D.  dasa-bhyas.     G.  dasanam. 

L.  dasa-su. 
N.A.  ekadasa.    D.  ekadasa-bhyas.    N.  dvadasa.     D.  dva- 

dasa-bhyas.     N.  trayodasa.     I.  trayodasa-bhis.     D. 

trayodasa-bhyas.      N.   pancadasa.      D.    paficadasa- 

bhyas.    N.  sodasa.    D.  sodasa-bhyas.    N.  saptadasa. 

D.saptadasa-bhyas.   N.  astadasa.   D.  astadasa-bhyas. 

N.   navadasa.     I.  navadasa-bhis.     D.  6kan  na  vim- 

satyai  (TS.). 

d.  The  cardinals  for  the  decades  from  hvcnty  to  ninety 
with  their  compounds  are  f.  substantives,  nearly  always 
inflected  in  the  sing,  and  according  to  the  declension  of  the 
stem  final ;  e.  g.  N.  vimsati-s.  A.  virnsati-m.  I.  vim- 
saty-a.  N.  trimsat.  A.  trimsat-am.  I.  trimsat-a.  L. 
trimsat-i.  If  the  sense  requires  it  these  numerals  may  be 
used  in  the  pi. ;  e.  g.  nava  navatis  nine  nineties ;  navanam 
navatinam  of  nine  nineties. 

sata  hundred  and  sahasra  tJioitsand  are  neuters,  which 
may  be  declined  in  all  numbers  ;  e.  g.  dv6  sat6  two  hundred ; 
sapta  satani  seven  hundred ;  tri  sahasrani  three  thousand. 

a.  In  the  group  five  to  nineteen  the  bare  stem  may  be  used  in  the 
oblique  cases  agreeing  with  substantives;  e.g.  sapta.  hotrbhih  with 
seven  priests  (cp.  194  B  a). 

Ordinals. 

107.  The  ordinals,  being  all  adjectives  ending  in  a,  are 
declined  in  the  m.  and  n.  like  priya.  The  f.  is  formed 
with  i  (declined  like  devi)  except  in  the  first  four,  which 
take  a. 

The  ordinals  from  first  to  tenth  are  formed  with  various 
suffixes,    viz.    (t)iya,    tha,    thama,    ma.       The    formation 


102 


DECLENSION 


[107 


of  the  first  four  is  somewhat  irregular.  The  stems  of  the 
ordinals  from  eleventh  to  nineteenth  differ  from  those  of 
the  corresponding  cardinals  only  in  being  accented  on  the 
final  syllable  ;  their  inflexion  diff^ers  from  that  of  the  latter 
in  following  priya.  Thus  ekadasa  eleventh  forms  the 
cases :  m.  s.  A.  ekadasa-m.  PI.  N.  ekadasasas.  A.  eka- 
dasan.     I.  ekadasais. 

The  ordinals  from  twentieth  to  ninetieth  (including  their 
compounds),  which  also  end  in  accented  a,  seem  to  be 
abbreviated  forms  of  the  corresponding  cardinals ;  e.  g. 
catvarimsa  fortieth.^ 

The  ordinals  for  hundredth  and  thousandth  are  formed 
with  the  superlative  suffix  tama  accented  on  the  final 
syllable  :  sata-tama,  sahasra-tama." 


1st    pra-thama,^  f.  a.^ 

5th 

panca-ma,  f.  i. 

2nd   dvi-t-iya,'^  f.  a. 

6th 

sas-tha  (Lat.  sex- 

tu-s). 

3rd    trt-iya,''  f.  a  (Lat.  tert- 

sapta-tha. 

iu-s). 

7th  H 

sapta-ma     (Lat. 

septi- 

tur-iya,'  f.  a  (for  catur- 

mu-s). 

iya   through    k-tur- 

8th 

asta-ma. 

4th        iya). 

9th 

nava-ma. 

catur-tha,  f.   i  {rirap- 

10th 

dasa-ma    (Lat. 

deci- 

To-s,  Lat.  guartu-s). 

mu-s). 

^  Only  about  three  examples  of  this  formation  have  been  noted  in 
the  Samhitas,  and  four  in  the  Brahmanas. 

2  Sahasra-tama  has  been  noted  in  B.  only. 

'  Probably  for  pra-tam^ /oremosf,  the  th  being  due  to  the  influence  of 
catur-thd,  &c. 

^  Both  prathama  and  trtiya  have  one  case-form  each  according  to 
the  pronominal  declension  in  the  AV. :  G.  pratham£syas  and  L.  trti- 
yasyam. 

'  From  an  older  dvi-t^  second. 

<>  From  an  older  tr-td  Oiird. 

"^  When  used  in  the  fractional  sense  of  one-fourth  accented  on  the 
iirst  syllable :  tiiriya  (AV.) ;  similarly  in  B.  cdturtha  one-fourth, 
trtiya  one-third. 


107-109]     OEDINALS.    NUMEEAL   DEKIVATIVES    103 


11th  eka-dasa. 

21st  eka-vimsa. 

34th  catus-trimsa  (B.). 

40fch  catvarimsa. 

48th  asta-catvarimsa. 


52nd  dva-pancasa  (B.). 

61st  eka-sas-ta  (B.). 

100th  sata-tama. 

1000th  sahasra-tama  (B.). 


Numeral  Derivatives. 

108.  A  number  of  derivatives,  chiefly  adverbs,  are  formed 
from  the  cardinals. 

a.  Multiplicative  adverbs :  sa-krt  wice  (lit.  one  maTcing) ; 
dvi-s  ttvice  (Gk.  Sl-9,  Lat.  bis) ;  tri-s  thrice  (Gk.  rpc-9,  Lat. 
fri-s) ;  catiis  four  times  (for  catur-s).  Others  are  expressed 
by  the  cardinal  and  the  form  krtv-as  times  (probably  makings 
A.  pi.  of  krtu)  which  is  used  as  a  separate  word  except  in 
asta-krtvas  (AV.)  eigJit  times ;  e.  g.  dasa  krtvas  (AV.)  ten 
times,  bhuri  krtvas  many  times. 

h.  Adverbs  of  manner  formed  with  the  suffix  dha : 
dvi-dha  in  two  ivays  or  jyarts,  tri-dha  and  tre-dha,  catur- 
dha,  panca-dha,  so-dha,  sapta-dha,  asta-dha,  nava-dha, 
sahasra-dha. 

c.  A  few  multiplicative  adjectives  derived  with  the 
suffixes  a,  taya,  vaya  meaning  -fold :  tray-a  threefold, 
dvay-a  twofold  ;  dasa-taya  tenfold  ;  catur-vaya  fourfold. 


PRONOUNS 

109.  Pronouns  differ  from  nouns  both  in  origin  and 
declension.  They  are  derived  from  a  small  class  of  roots 
with  a  demonstrative  sense,  and  they  have  several  distinct 
peculiarities  of  inflexion.  These  peculiarities  have  in 
varying  degrees  been  extended  to  several  groups  of  adjec- 
tives. 


104  DECLENSION  [109 


A.     Personal  Pronouns. 

This  class  displays  the  greatest  number  of  peculiarities : 
they  are  for  each  person  derived  from  several  roots  or 
combinations  of  roots ;  they  are  specially  irregular  in 
inflexion  :  they  do  not  distinguish  gender,  nor  to  some  ^ 
extent  even  number.  Some  resemble  neuters  in  form  ; 
a  few  have  no  apparent  case-ending  ;  in  two  of  them  the 
A.  pi.  m.  does  duty  as  f.  also. 

Singular.  Plural. 

N.  ah-am  I  tv-am  thou       vay-am  ive        yu-y-am "  ye 

A.  mam  me   ^^'"  tv-am  thee        asman  ^  us       [  ynsman  ^  you 

I.  ma-y-a  hy  me       j  tva  asma-bhis  hy  i 

Itva-y-a  us 

D.  ma-hyam '  ]  .  tu-bhyam  ^  to  ( asma-bhyam    yusma-bhyam 

ma-hya       1  thee  I     for  us  for  you 

Ab.  mad  from  me  tvsid  from  thee  asmad    from    yusmad    from 

us  you 

G.  ma-ma  of  me         tava  of  thee      asmaka-m  '      yusmaka-m* 

of  us  of  you 

L.  m.a-Y-i  in  me         itve^       .    ^^     fasma-su''    in    yusm6  in  you 
''  ,      .  m  thee 

(tva-y-i  1     us 

lasm6® 


'  Cp.  Lat.  mihi  and  tibi. 

*  Only  this,  the  normal  form  ( =  tva-i),  is  found  in  the  EV.  The 
irregular  tvdyi  appears  in  the  later  Samhitas. 

^  asman  and  yusman  ai'e  new  formations  according  to  the  nominal 
declension.  The  stems  are  compounds  of  the  pronominal  elements 
a  +  sma  and  yu  +  sma.  The  VS.  twice  has  the  distinctly  f.  new  forma- 
tion yusmas. 

*  asmakam  and  yusmakam  are  properly  the  A.  n.  s.  of  the  posses- 
sives  asmaka  our,  yusmaka  your. 

^  asmasu  is  a  new  formation  following  the  analogy  of  asmabhis. 

6  asme  is  also  used  as  D. 

■^  Changed  from  original  yus-am  by  the  influence  of  vay-am. 


109-110]  PERSONAL   PRONOUNS  105 

Dual.  N.  vam  '  and  avam  (SB.)  tve  two.  A.  avam "  (^B.)  us 
two.  Ab.  ava-bhyam  (K.)  and  avad  (TS.)/rom  us  two. 
G.  avay-os  (SB.)  of  us  two. 

N.  yuvam  ye  two.  A.  yuvam  you  two.  I.  yuva-bhyam 
and  yuva-bhyam  hy  you  two.  Ab.  yuvad  from  you 
two.     G.  yuv-6s  '  and  yuvay-os  of  you  two. 

a.  The  following  unaccented  forms,  inadmissible  at  the  beginning 
of  a  sentence,  are  also  used  :  Sing.  A.  ma,  tva.  D.G.  me  *  (Gk.  fioC),  te  * 
(Gk.  rot).  Du.  A.D.G.  nau  (Gk,  vwi),  vam.  PI.  A.D.G.  nas  (Lat.  nos), 
vas  (Lat.  vos). 

b.  The  usual  stems  of  these  pronouns  used  in  derivation  or  as  first 
member  of  compounds  are  :  ma,  asma ;  tva,  yuva,  yusma  ;  thus 
asma-druh  hating  us  ;  tva-yata  presented  by  thee  ;  yuva-yii  desiring  you 
two  ;  yusma-yd.nt  desiring  yon.  But  the  forms  mad,  asmad,  tvad  occur 
a  few  times  as  first  member  of  compounds ;  thus  mat-krta  done  bj  me  ; 
asmit-sakhi  having  us  as  companions  ;  tv^d-yoni  derived  from  thee. 


B.     Demonstrative  Pronouns. 

110.  The  inflexion  of  these  pronouns,  as  compared  with 
the  nominal  a  declension,  has  the  following  peculiarities  : 

1.  in  the  sing,  d  is  added  instead  of  m  in  the  N.A.  n.  ; 
the  element  sma  apjDears  between  the  root  and  the  ending 
in  the  D.Ab.L.  m.  n.,  and  sya  in  the  D.Ab.G.L.  f.  ;  in 
(instead  of  i)  is  the  ending  in  the  L.  m.  n.  2.  in  the  pi. 
the  N.  m.  ends  in  e  instead  of  as  ;  the  G.  has  s  instead  of  n 
before  the  ending  am. 

The  stem  ta  that  (also  he,  she,  it)  may  be  taken  as  the  type 
for  the  inflexion  of  adjectival  pronouns  : 


1  vam  (probably  abbreviated  for  avam),  occurring  once  in  the  RV., 
seems  to  be  the  only  N.  du.  form  found  in  the  Sarnhitas. 

^  The  N.  avam  (SB.)  and  A.  avam  (K.  SB.)  .seem  to  have  been  the 
normal  forms  judging  by  yuvdm  and  yuvam. 

^  yuv-6s  occurs  in  the  RV.,  yuvay-os  in  the  TS. 

*  me  and  te,  originally  L.,  have  come  to  be  used  as  D.  and  G. 


106 


DECLENSION 


[110 


Singular. 

Plural 

MASC.       NEUT. 

FEM. 

MASC.         NEUT. 

FEM. 

N. 

sa-s  ^      ta-d 

sa 

t6  (rot)    vta^ 

and 

tan            tani 

t6-bhis,  tais 

ta-s 

A. 

ta-m  2    ta-d 

ta-m 
ta-y-a 

ta-s 

I. 

t6na' 

ta-bhis 

(roT?) 

D. 

ta-smai  * 

ta-syai  * 

t6-bhyas 

ta-bhyas 

Ab. 

ta-smad  ^ 

ta-syas 

G. 

ta-sya " 

ta-syas 

t6-s-am  * 

ta-s-am " 

L. 

ta-smin 
sa-smin  ^ 

ta-syam 

t6-su 

ta-su 

Dual. 


G.Ii. 


N.A.  m.  'ta,  tau,  f.  t6,  n.  t6.     I.Ab.  m.  f,  ta-bhyam. 
m.  n.  tay-os. 

a.  The  stem  ti  is  frequently  used  in  derivation,  especially  that  of 
adverbs,  as  t4-tha  thus ;  the  n.  form  tdd  often  appears  as  first  member 
of  a  compound  ;  e.  g.  tdd-apas  accustomed  to  that  ivork. 

a.  There  are  three  other  demonstratives  derived  from  ta : 
1.  e-ta^°  this  here  is  inflected  exactly  like  ta.     The  forms 
that  occur  are : 


^  On  the  Sandhi  of  s£s  cp.  48  ;  s£,  sa,  td-d  =  Gk.  6,  tj,  to  ;  Gothic  sa, 
so,  tliat-a  (Eng.  that,  Lat.  is-tud). 

2  t^-m,  ta-m,  td-d  =  Gk.  t6-v,  ttj-v,  to. 

3  Sometimes  t§na, 

*  These  forms  have  the  normal  ending  e  :  =  t^sma-e,  tisya-e.  In 
B.  td,syai  is  substituted  for  the  G.  t^syas. 

°  The  Chandogya  Upanisad  once  has  sasmad. 

^  Homeric  Gk.  toio  (for  tosio). 

''  sasmin  occurs  nine  times  in  the  RV,,  tasmin  twenty-two  times. 

*  Cp.  Lat.  is-torum. 

'  Gk.  Taojv  (for  rdaaiv),  cp.  Lat.  is-tdrum. 

^^  The  stem  used  in  derivation  and  composition  is  eta  ;  e.g.  eta-vant 
so  great,  eta-dfs  such.  In  B.  etad  is  sometimes  thus  used  :  etad-da 
giving  this,  etan-miya  consisting  of  this. 


iio-iuj         DEMONSTEATIVE   PKONOUNS  107 

m.  Sing.  N.  esa-s  (67,  48).  A.  etam.  I,  et6na.  D.  eta- 
smai.  Ab.  etasmad.  G.  etasya. — Du.  N.  eta,  etau. — 
PI.  N.  et6.     A.  etan.    I.  et^bhis,  etais.    D.  et6bhyas. 

f.  Sing.  N.  esa.  A.  etam.  I.  etaya.  L.  etasyam. — Du.  N. 
et6.     PI.  etas.     A.  etas.     I.  etabhis.     L.  etasu. 

n.  Sing.  N.  etad.     PI.  N.  eta,  etani. 

2.  tya  is  derived  from  ta  with  the  suffix  ya  and  means 
that.  It  is  common  in  the  KV.,  but  rare  in  the  later 
Samhitas.'  Unlike  ta  it  is  used  adjectivally  only,  hardly 
ever  occurring  without  its  substantive.  It  never  begins 
a  sentence  except  when  followed  by  the  particles  u,  cid, 
nil,  or  su. 

The  forms  occurring  are  : 

m.  Sing.  N.  sya,^     A.  tyam.     G.  tyasya. — Du.  N.  tya. — 

PI.  N.  ty6.     A.  tyan.     I.  ty6bhis. 
f.  Sing.  N.  sya.     A.  tyam.     I.  tya.     G.  tyasyas. — Du.  N. 

tj6. — PI.  N.  tyas.     A.  tyas. 
n.  Sing.  tyad.     PI.  tya,  tyani. 

3,  A  very  rare  derivative  is  ta-ka  this  little,  which  occurs 
only  twice  in  the  EV.  in  the  two  A.  sing,  forms  m.  taka-m, 
n.  taka-d. 

a.  sima  seems  to  have  the  sense  of  an  emphatic  demonstrative.*  The 
forms  occurring  are:  Sing.  N.  sim^s.  V.  sima.  D.  simdsmai  (n.). 
Ab.  simdsmad.     PI.  simi. 

111.  In  the  inflexion  of  the  demonstrative  which  in  the 
N.  s.   ni.  appears  as  ayam  this  Jiere  the  two  pronominal 


*  It  is  also  found  a  few  times  in  B. 
^  See  48,  note  3. 

*  It  is  generally  given  the  meaning  of  every,  all,  but  the  above  is  the 
more  probable  sense. 


108 


DECLENSION 


[111 


roots  i  (which  nearly  always  has  a  double  ending)  and  a^ 
are  employed,  the  former  in  the  N.  (except  the  m.  s.)  and  A., 
the  latter  in  all  the  other  cases.  The  A.  s.  m.  f.  starts  from 
i-m  (the  A.  of  i),  which  appears  in  the  du.  and  pi.  also,  so 
that  all  these  cases  have  the  appearance  of  being  formed 
from  a  stem  ima." 


SlNaULAR. 
MASC.  NEUT. 

N.  a-y-am      i-d-am 
A.  im-am'     i-d-am 


I. 

D. 

Ab. 

G. 

L. 


e-na^ 
a-smai 
a-smad  '^ 
a-sya  ^ 
a-smin 


FEM. 

i-y-am 
i-m-am 

a-y-a ' 
a-syai 
a-syas 
a-syas 
a-syam 


MASC. 

i-m-6 
i-m-an 


Plural. 

NEUT. 

i-m-a 
i-m-ani 


e-bhis 
e-bhyas 

e-s-am 
e-su 


FEM. 

i-m-as 
i-m-as 

a-bhis 
a-bhyas 

a-s-am 
a-sii 


N.A.   m.  im-a,    -au. 
m.  G.L.  a-y-6s. 


Dual. 
f.   im-6.      n.   im-6.      m.    D.Ab.   a-bhyam. 


1  These  two  roots  are  frequently  used  in  derivation  ;  e.  g.  a-tra  here, 
a-tha  then  ;  i-da  noxo,  i-hd  here,  i-tara  other, 

2  From  this  stem  is  formed  the  adverb  ima-tha  thus. 

s  Here  i-m  is  the  A.  of  i,  from  which  is  also  formed  the  A.  f.  i-m 
and  the  n.  i-d,  both  used  as  particles. 

*  Also  twice  ana.  ena  and  the  remaining  oblique  cases,  when  used 
as  nouns  and  unemphatic,  may  lose  their  accent. 

s  The  Ab.,  according  to  the  nominal  declension,  ad  is  used  as  a 
conjunction. 

6  Both  asya  and  asmai  may  be  accented  dsya  and  asmai  when 
emphatic  at  the  beginning  of  a  Pada.  The  form  imdsya  occurs  once 
in  the  RV.  instead  of  asya  ;  and  imasmai  in  the  AA.  for  asmai. 

■^  Instead  of  aya  the  form  andya  occurs  twice  in  the  KV.  :  it  is  the 
only  form  from  ana  found  in  the  Samhitas. 


112]  DEMONSTRATIVE   PRONOUNS  109 

112.  The  demonstrative  corresponding  to  ayam  employed 
to  express  remoteness  in  the  sense  of  that  there,  you,  and 
having  in  the  N.  s.  the  curious  forms  m.  f.  a-s-au,  n.  a-d-as, 
uses  throughout  its  inflexion  the  root  a,  but  always  in  an 
extended  form.  The  fundamental  stem  used  in  every  case 
(except  the  N.  s.)  is  a-m  A.  m.  of  a.  This  is  extended  by 
the  addition  of  the  particle  u  to  amu,'  which  appears 
throughout  the  sing,  (with  u  in  A.  f.)  except  the  N.  In  the 
pi.  amu  is  the  f.  and  ami  the  m.  stem  (except  the  A.). 

The  forms  occurring  are : 

m.  Sing.  N.  a-sau."  A.  a-m-u-m,  I,  amu-n-a.  D.  amu- 
smai.  Ab.  amii-smad.  G.  amii-sya. '  L.  amu-smin. — 
PI.  ami.     A.  amun.     D.  ami-bhyas.     G.  ami-sam. 

f.  Sing.  N.  a-sau.-  A.  a-m-ifi-m.  I.  amu-y-a.*  D.  amu- 
syai.  G.  amu-syas. — Du.  N.  amu. — PI.  N.  amu-s. 
A.  amu-s. 

n.  Sing.  N.  a-d-as.''     PL  N.  amu. 

a.  The  unaccented  defective  pronoun  of  the  third  person 
e-na"  [he,  she,  it)  is  declined  in  the  A.  of  all  numbers, 
besides  the  I.  s.  and  the  G.  du. 

A.  sing.  m.  ena-m,    f.   ena-m,    n.  ena-d. — Du.   m.  enau, 

f.  ene. — PI.  m.  enan,  f.  ena-s. 
I.  sing,  enena,     G.  du.  en-os  (RV.),  enay-os  (AV.). 

a.  Another  unaccented  demonstrative  pronoun  restricted  to  the  RV. 
(excepting  one  form  in  the  AV.  and  the  TS.)  is  tva  meaning  one,  many 


1  This  stem  is  used  in  derivation  ;  e.g.  amu-tas  thence,  amu-tra  there, 
amii-tha  thus  (B.). 

^  Here  the  pronominal  root  a  seems  to  be  compounded  with  sa 
extended  by  tlie  particle  a  :  a-sa-u  and  a-sa-u. 

"  This  is  the  only  example  of  sya  being  added  to  any  but  an  a  stem. 

*  Used  adverbially,  with  shifted  accent. 

''Here  the  neuter  a-d  of  tlie  pronominal  root  a  is  extended  with 
the  suffix  as. 

"  Here  we  have  the  same  e  (L.  of  a)  as  in  6-ka  one,  e-vd,  thvs. 


110  DECLENSION  [112-]13 

a  one,  generally  repeated  in  the  sense  of  one  another.    The  n.  tvad 
meaning  parily  is  also  found  in  B.     The  forms  occurring  are : 

Sing.  N.  m.  tvas,  f.  tva,  n.  tvad.  A.  m.  tvam.  I.  m.  tvena. 
D.  m.  tvasmai,  f.  tvasyai. — PI.  m.  tve. 

p.  The  pronoun  av^  this  occurs  only  in  the  G.  du.  form  av63  in 
combination  with  vam  meaning  of  you  tivo  being  such  (used  like  sa  in 
s6,  tv4m  thou  as  such). 

y.  The  pronoun  dma  ^  this  occurs  only  once  in  the  AV.  (also  in 
the  AB.)  in  the  formula  dmo  'h^m  asmi  this  am  I. 


C.     Interrogative  Pronoun. 

113.  The  interrogative  ka  who  ?  which  ?  ivhat  ?  used  as 
both  substantive  and  adjective,  is  inflected  exactly  like  ta, 
excepting  the  alternative  neuter  form  ki-m,"  which  instead 
of  the  pronominal  d  has  the  nominal  m  (never  elsewhere 
attached  to  a  stem  in  i).  The  forms  occurring  are : 
m.   Sing.   ka-s.     A.   ka-m.     I.   k6na.     D.  ka-smai.     Ah. 

ka-smad.     G.  ka-sya.     L.  ka-smin. — Du.  N.  kau. — 

PI.  k6.     I.  k6-bhis.     L.  k6-su. 
f.  Sing.  N.  ka.    A.  ka-m.    I.  ka-y-a.     G.  ka-syas. — PI.  N. 

ka-s.     A.  ka-s.     L.  ka-su. 
n.  Sing.  N.A.  ka-d  and  ki-m.^ — PI.  N.  ka  and  kani. 

a.  In  derivation  the  stems  ki  and  ku  as  well  as  ka  are  used ;  e.  g. 
ki-y-ant  how  great  ?  ku-ha  ichere  ?  ka-ti  hoic  many  ? 

As  first  member  of  a  compound  kad  occurs  twice  :  kat-paya  greatly 
swelling,  k^d-artha  having  what  purpose?  kim  is  similarly  used  a  few 
times  in  the  later  Samhitas  and  the  Brahmanas ;  e.  g.  kim-kard 
servant. 

b.  k&-ya,  an  extended  form  of  kfi,  occurring  in  the  G.  only,  is  found 
in  combination  with  cid  :  kdyasya  cid  of  whomsoever. 


1  From  this  pronoun  are  derived  the   I.   and  Ab.  adverbs  (with 
shifted  accent)  ama  at  home  and  amad/rom  7iear. 

*  The  N.  s.m.  is  preserved  as  a  petrified  form  in  nS-ki-s  and  ma-ki-s 
no  one,  nothing. 

2  The  relative  frequency  of  kA-d  and  ki-m  is  in  tlie  RV.  as  two  to 
three. 


11-115]  RELATIVE  AND  REFLEXIVE  PEONOUNS   111 

D.    Relative  Pronoun. 

114.  The  relative  pronoun  ya  who,  which,  what  is  declined 
exactly  like  ta.     The  forms  occurring  are : 

m.  Sing.  N.  ya-s.     A,  ya-m.     I.  y6na  ^  and  y^na.     D.  ya- 

smai.     Ab.  ya-smad.''     G.  ya-sya.     L.  ya-smin. 
Du,  N.  ya,  yau.     D.  ya-bhyam.     G.  ya-y-os.     L.  ya-y-os 

and  y-6s.^ 
PI.  N.  j6.     A.  yan.     I.  y6-bhis  and  yais.     D.  y6-bhyas. 

G.  y6-s-am.     L.  y6-su. 
f.    Sing.    N.  ya.       A.   ya-m.       I.    ya-y-a.       G.    ya-syas. 

L.  ya-syam. 
Du.  N.  y6.     G.L.  ya-y-os. 
PI.  N.  ya-s.     A.  ya-s.     I.  ya-bhis.     D.  ya-bhyas.     G.  ya- 

s-am.     L.  ya-su. 
n.   N.A.  Sing.  ya-d.     Du.  j6.     PI.  ya,  yani. 

a.  The  stem  of  yi,  is  used  to  form  derivatives  ;  e.  g.  ya-tha,  as.  It 
also  appears  as  first  member  of  a  compound  in  ya-dfs  which  like.  The 
neuter  ydd  is  also  once  used  thus  in  the  EV.  :  ydt-kama  desiring  ivhat ; 
and  a  few  times  later,  as  yad-devatya  having  ivhat  deity  (K.),  yat-karin 
doing  what  (SB.). 

h.  A  form  of  the  relative  extended  with  the  diminutive  suffix  ka, 
ya-kd  who,  occurs  only  in  the  sing.  N.  m.  ya-kd-s,  f.  ya-ka,  and  the  pi. 
IN",  m.  ya-k6. 

E.     Reflexive  Pronouns. 

115.  a.  The  reflexive  indeclinable  substantive  sva-y-am  ** 
self  is  properly  used  as  a  N.  referring  to  all  three  persons. 
Sometimes,   however,  its  N.   nature  being  forgotten,  it  is 


^  y^na  is  twice  as  common  in  the  RV.  as  y6na,  but  the  Pada  text 
always  reads  y^na. 

'^  The  Ab.,  formed  according  to  the  nominal  declension,  yad  is  used 
as  a  conjunction. 

^  y-6s  for  yd-y-os  like  yuv-6s  for  yuvd-y-os  (p.  105,  note  3). 

*  Derived  from  svfi  with  suffix  am  and  interposed  y  (like  a-y-am 
from  a). 


112  DECLENSION  [115-116 

used  as  an  A.  ;  e.  g.  ayuji  svayam  dhuri  I  have  yoked  myself 
to  the  pole  ;  or  as  agreeing  in  sense  ^yith  another  case.  It 
occasionally  means  spontaneously. 

h.  tanu  body  is  used  in  the  EV.  to  express  self  in  other 
cases  than  the  N.  and  in  all  numbers.  The  reflexive 
pronoun  sva  and  a  possessive  G.  may  be  added ;  e.  g. 
yajasva  tanvam  ivorship  thyself  a,iid  yajasva  tanvam  tava 
svam  worship  thine  own  self.  The  reflexive  sense  of  tanu 
has  disappeared  in  B. 

a.  There  are  one  or  two  instances  in  the  RV.  of  the  incipient  use  of 
atman  soul  in  a  reflexive  sense  ;  e.  g.  balam  dadhana  atmani  putting 
force  into  himself.  The  A.  atmanam  is  frequently  thus  used  in  the  later 
Sarnhitas  (though  never  in  the  RV.)  and  in  B. 

c.  sva  own  is  a  reflexive  adjective  referring  to  all  three 
persons  and  numbers.  It  is  inflected  like  an  ordinary 
adjective  (priya)  in  the  RV.  (except  the  two  isolated 
pronominal  forms  svasmin  and  svasyas).  The  forms 
occurring  are : 
m.  Sing.   N,  svas  (Lat.  suits).      A.  svam.      I.  sv6na  and 

sv6na.     D.   svaya.     Ab.    svad.     G.    svasya.     L.  sv6 

and  svasmin  (RV.). 
PI.  N.  svas.     A.   svan.     I.  sv6bhis  and   svais.     D.   sv6- 

bhyas.     G.  svanam.     L.  svesu. 
f.    Sing.    N.    sva   (Lat.    sua).      A.    svam.      I.    svaya.      D. 

svayai.     Ab.  svayas.    G.  svasyas  (RV.).    L.  svayam, 
PI.  N.  svas.     A.  svas.     I.  svabhis.     L.  svasu. 
n.  Sing.  N.A.  svam  (Lat.  suum).     PI.  A.  sva  (Lat.  sua). 

o.  As  first  member  of  compounds  svd.  several  times  appears  in  the 
substantive  (as  well  as  the  adj.)  sense;  e.g.  sva-yukta  self-yoked. 
svayam  is  similarly  used  in  the  Sarnhitas  ;  e.g.  svayam-ja  self-lorn. 

F.    Possessive   Pronouns. 

116.  Possessive  pronouns  are  rare  because  the  G.  of  the 
personal  pronoun  is  generally  used  to  express  the  sense 
which  they  convey. 


116-117]  PKONOMINAL   COMPOUNDS  113 

a.  The  possessives  of  the  first  person  are  mama-ka  and 
mama-ka  ^  my  and  asma-ka  our.    Tlie  forms  occurring  are  : 

Sing.  D.  mamakaya.     G.  mamakasya. 

Sing.  N.  m.  mamaka-s.    n.  mamaka-m.     PI.  G.  mamaka- 

nam. 
Sing.    N.A.    n.    asmaka-m.'^      I.    asmakena.      PI.    N.    m. 

asmakasas.     I.  asmake-bhis. 

The  n.  s.  asmakara,  by  fai-  the  commonest  of  these  forms,  is  used  as 
the  G.  pi.  of  the  personal  pronoun  =  of  us  (109). 

h.  The  possessives  of  the  second  person  are  tava-ka^  thy 
(only  D.  pi.  tavak6bhyas),  tva  tliy  (only  I.  pi.  f.  tva-bhis), 
and  yusma-ka  your.  Of  the  latter,  three  forms  occur: 
I.  s.  m.  yusmakena,  pi.  f.  yusmaka-bhis,  and  the  N.A.  n. 
yusmakam  used  as  the  G.  pi.  of  the  second  personal 
pronoun  =  of  you. 

e.  Besides  being  used  reflexively  sva  is  fairly  often 
employed  as  a  simple  possessive,  generally  of  the  third 
person  (like  Lat.  suus),  his,  her,  their,  but  also  of  the  second, 
thy,  your,  and  of  the  first,  my,  our.  The  inflexion  (115  c)  is 
the  same  in  both  senses. 

G.    Pronominal  Compounds  and  Derivatives. 

117.  With  -drs^  in  the  EV.  and  other  Samhitas,  and 
with  -drksa  in  the  VS.  are  formed  the  following  pronominal 
compounds :  i-drs,  ta-drs,  eta-drs  such,  ki-drs  '  what  liJce  ? 
ya-drs '"'  what  like  ;  i-drksa,  eta-drksa  such. 


^  Both  formed  from  the  G.  of  the  personal  pronoun  mdina.  There 
also  occurs  once  in  the  RV.  the  derivative  ma-k-ina  my. 

^  The  VS.  has  once  the  N.  s.  asmakd-s  our  formed  like  mamaka  beside 
mdimaka. 

^  Formed  from  the  G.  tava. 

*  In  the  Brahmanas  (SB.)  -drsa  begins  to  appear  :  i-ifsa,  ta-dfsa, 
ya-drsa. 

5  N.  s.  m.  ki-drn. 

^  With  the  very  anomalous  L.  s.  yadfsmin. 

1819  I 


114  DECLENSION  [117-119 

a.  With  the  suffix  -ka,  conveying  a  diminutive  or  contemptuous 
meaning,  very  rarely  used  derivatives  are  formed  from  the  pronouns 
ti,  ya,  sa,  and  asd,u:  ta-kd  tliaf  little  (110.  3),  yd-ka  7vko,  which  (114  &), 
sa-kfi  (only  N.  s.  f.  sa-ka),  asakau  N.  s.  f.  that  little  (VS.). 

h.  With  the  comparative  suffix  -tara  derivatives  are  formed  from  i, 
kd,  yd.,  and  with  the  superlative  suffix  -tama  from  the  latter  two 
(op.  120)  :  i-tara  other,  ka-tara  lohich  of  two?  ya-tarfi,  %cho  or  which  oftivo  ; 
ka-tam&  tvho  or  which  of  many?  ya-tama  who  orivhich  of  many, 

118.  a.  With  ti  derivatives  with  a  numerical  sense  are 
formed  from  ka,  ta,  and  ya :  ka-ti  liow  many  1  (Lat.  quot) ; 
td-ti  so  many  (Lat.  toti-dem) ;  ya-ti  as  many.  No  inflected 
forms  of  these  M'ords  occur.  They  appear  in  the  sense  of 
the  N.A.  pi.  only. 

b.  With  yant  expressing  the  quantitative  meaning  of 
much  derivatives  are  formed  from  i  and  ki :  1-yant  so  much : 
n.  s.  N.  iyat,  pi.  iyanti ;  f.  s.  D.  iyatyai ;  ki-yant  how 
much  ? :  sing.  N.  n.  kiyat ;  f.  kiyati.  D.  m.  kiyate. 
L.  kiyati  (for  kiyati). 

c.  With  vant  are  formed  derivatives  from  personal  pro- 
nouns with  the  sense  of  liJ\e,  attached  to ;  and  from  others  in 
the  quantitative  sense  of  great ;  thus  tva-vant  like  thee, 
ma-vant  like  vie,  yuva-vant  devoted  to  you  ttvo  (only  D. 
yuvavate) ;  yusma-vant  belonging  to  ymt  (only  L.  pi. 
yusmavatsu) ;  eta-vant  and  ta-vant  so  great ;  ya-vant  as 
great;  i-vant  so  great  (s.  N.  n.  ivat.  D.  m.  n.  ivate. 
G.  ivatas  :  pi.  A.  m.  ivatas) ;  ki-vant  lioic  far?  (G.  s. 
kivatas). 

Indefinite  Pronouns. 

119.  a.  The  only  simple  pronoun  which  has  an  un- 
doubtedly indefinite  sense  is  sama  (unaccented)  any,  every. 
The  six  forms  that  occur  are :  m.  s.  A.  samam.  D.  samas- 
mai.  Ab.  samasmad.  G.  samasya.  L.  samasmin. 
PI.  N.  same. 


119-120]  PRONOMINAL   ADJECTIVES  115 

b.  Compound  indefinite  pronouns  are  foi'med  by  combining 
the  particles  ca,  cana,  or  cid  with  the  interrogative  ka ; 
thus  kas  ca  an^/,  any  one ;  kas  cana  any  one  soever,  every ; 
kas  cid  any,  some ;  any  one,  some  one. 


Pronominal  Adjectives. 

120.  Several  adjectives  derived  from  or  allied  in  mean- 
ing to  pronouns,  follow  the  pronominal  declension  (110) 
altogether  or  in  part. 

a.  The  adjectives  that  strictly  adhere  to  the  pronominal 
type  of  inflexion  are  anya  other  and  the  derivatives  formed 
with  tara  and  tama  from  ka  and  ya.  The  specifically 
pronominal  cases  of  the  latter  that  have  been  met  with  are  : 
Sing.  N.  n.  katara-d,  yatara-d;  katama-d,  yatama-d. 
D.  katama-smai.  G.  f.  katama-syas.  L.  f.  yatama-syam. 
PI.  N.  m.  katam^,  yatam6,  yatar6  (K.).  From  itara  occur  in 
the  Kathaka  Samhita  m.  D.  s.  itarasmai  and  N.  pi.  itare. 
The  forms  of  anya  that  occur  are : 

m.  Sing.  N.  anya-s.     A.  anya-m,     I.  any^na.     D.  anya- 

smai.     G.  anya-sya.     L.   anya-smln. — PL   N.   anye. 

A.  anyan.    I.  any6-bhis  and  anyais.     D.  any^-bhyas. 

G.  any6-sam.     L.  any6-su. 
f.  Sing.  N.  anya.    A.  anyam.    I,  anya-y-a.    D.  anya-syai. 

G.  anya-syas.     L.  anya-syam. — Du.  N.  any6. — PI.  N. 

anya-s.      A.  anya-s.      I.   anya-bhis.     G.   anya-sam. 

L.  anya-su. 
n.  Sing.  N.  anya-d. — Du.  I.  anya-bhyam. — PI.  N.  anya. 

h.  visva  all,  sarva  whole,  6ka  one  are  partially  pronom- 
inal, differing  only  in  taking  m  instead  of  d  in  the  N.  A.  s.  n. 
Thus: 
Sing.   D.   visvasmai.'      Ab.  visvasmad.^     L.   visvasmin.^ 


^  The  RV.  has  tlie  nominal  forms  D.  visvaya,  Ab.  vfsvat,  L.  vi'ilve, 
once  each. 

i2 


IIG  DECLENSION  [120 

PI.   N.   visve.     G.   m.   visvesam,     f.   visvasam ;   but 

sing.  N.  n.  visvam. 
Sing.  D.  m.  sarvasmai.  f.  sarvasyai.     Ab.  m.  sarvasmad. 

PI.  m.  N.  sarve.     G,   sarvesam.     f.    sarvasam  ;   but 

sing.  N.  n.  sarvam. 
Sing.  G.  f.  6kasyas.      L.  m.  6kasmin.^     PI.  N.  m.  6ke  ; 

but  sing.  N.  n.  6kani. 
c.  More  than  a  dozen  other  adjectives,  having  pronominal 
affinities  in  form  or  meaning,  occasionally  have  pronominal 
case-forms  (but  always  m  instead  of  d  in  the  N.A.  s.  n.) : 

1.  Eight  adjectives  formed  witli  the  comparative  suffixes 
-tara  and  -ra,  and  the  superlative  suffix  -ma :  ut-tara  hiffher, 
later : 

Sing.  Ab.  L.  aittarasmad  and  littarasmin  beside  littarad 
and  littare.  L.  f.  uttarasyam.  PI.  N.  uttare.  G.  uttare- 
sam  (K.). 

apa-ra,  ava-ra,  upa-ra  loiver:  sing.  L.  aparasmin  (K.). 
PI.  N.  m.  apare,  avare,  lipare  beside  aparasas,  avarasas, 
uparasas  and  uparas. 

ava-ma  loirest :  L.  s.  f.  avamasyam. 

upa-ma  highest :  L.  s.  f.  upamasyam. 

para-ma  farthest:  sing.  f.  G.  paramasyas.  L.  para- 
masyam.     PI.  m.  N.  paramd  (K.). 

madhya-ma  middlemost :  sing.  f.  L.  madhyamasyam. 

2.  Five  other  adjectives  with  a  comparative  or  pronominal 
sense : 

para  ulterior :  sing.  D.  m.  parasmai.  Ab.  m.  parasmad. 
li.  m.  parasmin  beside  pare.  G.  f.  parasyas.  PI.  m.  N. 
pare  beside  parasas.     G.  paresam. 

piirva  prior:  sing.  D.  purvasmai.  Ab.  purvasmad. 
L.  purvasmin  (K.),  f.  purvasyam.  PI.  N.  m.  purve  (very 
common)  beside  piirvasas  (very  i*are).  G.  m.  ptirvesam, 
f.  piirvasam. 

'  The  AV.  once  has  §ke  as  L.  sing. 


120-121]  CONJUGATION  117 

nema  '  other  :  sing.  L.  m.  n^masmin.  PI.  N.  iii.  neme,  but  G.  nema- 
nam  (unaccented). 

sva  own  (116c),  othei"\vise  following  the  nominal  declension,  has 
once  sing.  G.  f.  svasyas  and  once  L.  n.  svasmin, 

samana  similar,  common  has  once  sing.  Ab.  n.  samanasmad  beside 
samanad. 

3.  Four  adjectives,  numerical  in  form  or  meaning,  have 
occasional  pronominal  endings :  prathama  first  has  the 
sing.  G.  f.  prathamasyas ;  -  trtiya  third  has  sing.  L.  f. 
trtiyasyam  ;  -  libhaya  of  both  Jdnds  has  pi.  m.  G.  ubhayesam 
and  N.  ubhaye  beside  ubhayasas  and  libhayas  ;  ^  kevala 
exclusive  has  once  pi.  N.  m.  k^vale. 


CHAPTER   IV 
CONJUGATION 

121.  Vedic  verbs  are  inflected  in  two  voices,  active  and 
middle.  The  middle  forms  may  be  employed  in  a  passive 
sense,  except  in  the  present  system,  which  has  a  special 
passive  stem  inflected  with  the  middle  endings.  Some 
verbs  are  conjugated  in  both  active  and  middle,  e.  g.  krno-ti 
and  krnu-t6  makes  ;  others  in  one  voice  only,  e.  g.  as-ti  is  ; 
others  partly  in  one,  partly  in  the  other ;  e.  g.  varta-te 
turns,  but  perfect  va-vart-a  has  turned. 

a.  The  Vedic  verb  has  in  each  tense  and  mood  three 
numbers,   Singular,   Dual,   and  Plural,  all  in  regular  use, 


^  Perhaps  from  na  +  ima  not  this. 

2  Cp.  107,  note  4. 

3  ubha  both  is  declined  in  the  Du.  only  :  N.A.  m.  ubha,  f.  ubhe. 
I.  ubhabhyam.     G.  ubhayos. 


118  CONJUGATION  [121-122 

with  three  persons  in  each  (except  the  imperative  in  which 
the  first  persons  are  wanting). 

122.  There  are  five  tenses  in  ordinary  use,  the  present, 
the  imperfect,  the  perfect,  the  aorist,  and  the  future.  The 
terms  imperfect,  perfect,  aorist  are  here  used  in  a  purely 
formal  sense,  that  is,  as  corresponding  in  formation  to  the 
Greek  tenses  Ijearing  those  names.  No  Vedic  tense  has  an 
imperfect  meaning,  while  the  perfect  sense  is  generally 
expressed  by  the  aorist. 

a.  Besides  the  indicative  there  are  four  moods,  the 
subjunctive,  the  injunctive,  the  optative,  and  the  imj)erative, 
all  of  which  are  formed  from  the  stems  of  the  present,  the 
perfect,  and  the  aorist.  The  imperfect  has  no  moods ;  and 
the  only  modal  form  occurring  in  the  future  is  the  unique 
subjunctive  karisyas  from  kr  make. 

a.  The  subjunctive,  very  common  in  the  RV.  and  the  AV.,  is  three 
or  four  times  as  frequent  as  the  optative ;  the  hitter,  comparatively 
rare  in  the  Samhitas,  occurs  far  oftener  than  the  former  in  the 
Brahmanas.     Both  form  stems  with  a  special  modal  affix. 

The  subj.  adda  a  to  the  indicative  stem  :  when  the  latter  distin- 
guishes a  strong  and  a  weak  stem,  the  a  is  attached  to  the  former, 
while  it  coalesces  to  a  with  the  final  of  a  stems.  Thus  the  pr.  subj. 
stem  of  duh  '»nlk  is  doh-a,  of  joij  jom  yundj-a,  but  of  bhu  he  bhava. 

The  opt.  adds  ya  or  i,  which  when  strong  and  weak  stems  are  dis- 
tinguished are  attached  to  the  latter.  Stems  in  a  take  i  throughout ; 
others  take  i  in  the  mid.,  ya  in  the  act. ;  thus  the  pr.  opt.  stem  of  bhii 
is  bhave  ( =  bhdva-i) ;  of  duh  and  yuj,  act.  duh-ya,  yuiij-ya,  mid. 
duh-i,  yuiij-i. 

The  inj.  is  identical  in  form  with  an  unaugmented  j^ast  tense 
(impf.,  aor.,  plup.).  It  is  very  common  in  the  RV.,  but  has  almost 
disappeared  from  the  Brahmanas,  except  when  used  with  the  prohibi- 
tive particle  ma. 

The  impv.  has  no  modal  affix,  adding  its  endings  direct  to  the  tense 
stem  ;  e.  g.  2.  s.pr.  vid-dhi  hioiv,  pf.  mumug-dhi  release,  aor.  ^ru-dhl  hear. 
In  the  2.  3.  du.  and  2.  pi.  act.  and  mid.  (ending  in  tam,  tam;  atham, 
atam  ;  ta  :  dhvam)  it  is  identical  with  the  inj. 

h.  Participles,  active  and  middle,  are  formed  from  the 
tense  stem  of  the  present,  future,  aorist,  and  perfect.    There 


122-124]  THE  PKESENT  SYSTEM  119 

are  also  passive  particii^les,  present,  perfect,  and  future ; 
the  first  being  formed  from  the  passive  stem  in  ya,  the 
other  two  from  the  root. 

c.  There  are  also  gerunds,  which  are  stereotyped  cases 
(chiefly  instrumentals)  of  verbal  nouns  and  having  the  value 
of  indeclinable  active  participles  with  a  prevailingly  past 
sense  ;  e.  g.  gatvi  and  gatvaya  having  gone. 

d.  There  are  about  a  dozen  differently  formed  types  of 
infinitives,  which  are  cases  of  verbal  nouns  made  directly 
or  with  a  suffix  from  the  root,  and  hardly  ever  connected 
with  a  tense  stem  ;  e.  g.  idh-am  to  kindle ;  gan-tavai  to  go. 


The  Present  System. 

123.  While  the  perfect,  aorist,  and  future  tenses  add  the 
endings  directly  (or  after  inserting  a  sibilant)  to  the  root, 
the  present  group  (that  is,  the  present  with  its  moods  and 
participles,  and  the  imperfect)  forms  a  special  stem,  which 
is  made  in  eight  different  ways  by  primary  verbs. 


The  Eight  Classes. 

124.  These  eight  classes  are  divided  into  two  conjuga- 
tions. In  the  first,  which  comprises  the  first,  fourth,  and 
sixth  classes,  the  present  stem  ends  in  a  and  remains 
unchanged  throughout  (like  the  a  declension).  The  secondary 
conjugations  in  a  (desideratives,  intensives,  causatives, 
denominatives)  as  well  as  the  future  follow  this  conjugation 
in  their  inflexion.  The  second  or  graded  conjugation  is 
characterized  by  shift  of  accent  between  stem  and  ending, 
accompanied  by  vowel  gradation.  It  comprises  the  remain- 
ing five  classes,  in  which  the  terminations  are  added  directly 
to  the  final  of  the  root  or  to  the  (graded)  suffixes  no  or  na, 
and  the  stem  is  changeable,  being  either  strong  or  weak. 


120  CONJUGATION  [1-25-127 

A.    First  Conjugation. 

125.  1.  The  first  or  Bhu  class  adds  a  to  the  last  letter  of 
the  root,  which  being  accented  takes  Guna  of  a  final  vowel 
(short  or  long)  and  of  a  short  medial  vowel  followed  by  one 
consonant ;  e.  g.  ji  conquer :  jay-a  ;  bhu  Jje  :  bhav-a  ;  budh 
aicake:  bodh-a. 

2.  The  sixth  or  Tud  class  adds  an  accented  a  to  the  root, 
which  being  unaccented  has  no  Guna.  Before  this  a  final  f 
is  changed  to  ir. 

3.  The  fourth  or  Div  class  adds  ya  to  the  last  letter  of 
the  root,  which  is  accented;^  e.g.  nah  hind:  nah-ya ;  div 
'play:  div-ya  (cp.  15,  1  c). 


B.    Second  Conjugation. 

126.  The  strong  forms  are : 

1.  The  singular  present  and  imperfect  active  ; 

2.  The  whole  subjunctive  ; 

3.  The  third  person  singular  imperative  active. 

In  these  forms  the  vowel  of  the  root  or  of  the  affix,  being- 
accented,  is  strengthened  ;  while  in  the  weak  forms  it  is 
reduced  because  the  terminations  are  accented. 

a.  In  the  ninth  class  the  accented  form  of  the  affix  is  na,  the  unac- 
cented ni  or  n  ;  in  the  seventh  they  are  respectively  nd  and  n. 

127.  1.  The  second  or  root  class  adds  the  terminations 
directly  to  the  root  (in  the  subjunctive  and  optative  with 
the  intervening  modal  suffix).  The  radical  vowel  in  the 
strong  forms  is  accented  -  and  takes  Guna  if  possible  (125,  1) ; 


^  The  weak  form  in  some  instances  assumed  by  the  root  points  to 
the  ya  having  originally  been  accented  (cp.  133  B  1). 

2  Except  in  the  augmented  (128  c)  imperfect  singular  because  the 
augment  is  invariably  accented. 


127]  FOEMATION   OF   PKESENT   STEM  121 

e.  g.  from  i  go :  sing.  1.  6-nii,  6-si,  6-ti ;  dvis  hate  :  dv^s-mi, 
dv6k-si,  dv6s-ti. 

2.  The  third  or  reduplicating  class  acids  the  terminations 
directly  to  the  reduplicated  root,  which  in  the  strong  forms 
takes  Guna  if  possible.  Contrary  to  analogy,  the  accent  is 
not,  in  the  majority  of  verbs  belonging  to  this  class,  on  the 
root  in  the  strong  forms,  but  on  the  reduplicative  syllable 
(which  is  also  accented  in  the  3.  pi.  act.  and  mid.).^  Thus 
hxi  sacrifice :  Sing.  1.  ju-ho-mi,  pi.  l.ju-hu-mas;  bhr  &car: 
Sing.  1.  bi-bhar-mi,  pi.  1.  bibhr-mas,  3.  bi-bhr-ati.^ 

3.  The  seventh  or  infixing  nasal  class  adds  the  termina- 
tions directly  to  the  final  consonant,  before  which  na  is 
inserted  in  the  strong  and  n  in  the  weak  forms  ;  e.  g.  yuj 
join :  yu-na-j-mi.  yu.nj-mas. 

4.  The  fifth  or  nu  class  adds  in  the  strong  forms  the 
accented  syllable  no,  which  in  the  weak  forms  is  reduced 
to  nu  ;  e.  g.  kr  mahe :  kr-no-mi,  krn-mas.^ 

a.  Four  roots  ending  in  n  liave  the  appearance  of  being  formed  with 
a  sutfix  u,  but  this  is  probably  due  to  the  an.  of  the  root  being  reduced 
to  the  sonant  nasal  ;  thus  from  tan  stretch  ta-nu  (for  tn-nu).  In  the 
tenth  Mandala  of  the  RV.  the  anomalous  weak  stem  kur-u  appears 
three  times  (beside  the  normal  kr-nu)  and  the  strong  stem  karo  in 
the  AV.  These  stems  gave  rise  to  the  eighth  or  u  class  of  Sanskrit 
grammar. 

5.  The  ninth  or  na  class  adds  to  the  root  in  the  strong 
forms  the  accented  syllable  na,  which  in  the  weak  forms  is 
reduced  to  ni  before  consonants  and  n  before  vowels.  The 
root  shows  a  tendency  to  be  weakened.  Thus  grabh  seize: 
grbh-na-mi,  pi.  1.  grbh-ni-masi  and  grbh-ni-mas,  3.  grbh- 
n-anti. 


*  It  is  doubtless  as  a  result  of  this  accentuation  that  these  verbs 
lose  the  n  of  the  endings  in  these  two  forms  :  bibhr-ati,  bibhr-ate. 

2  The    intensives    conjugated    in     the    active    (172)    follow    this 
class. 

3  The  u  is  dropped  before  the  m  of  the  1.  pi.  ind.  act.  and  mid. 


122  CONJUGATION  [128-129 

The  Augment. 

128.  The  imperfect,  pluperfect,  aorist,  and  conditional 
generally  prefix  to  the  stem  the  accented  syllable  a  which 
gives  to  those  forms  the  sense  of  past  time. 

a.  This  augment  sometimes  appears  lengthened,  before 
the  n,  y,  r,  v  of  seven  or  eight  roots :  aor.  a-nat  (nas  attain) ; 
impf.  a-yunak,  aor.  a-yukta,  a-yuksatam  (yuj  join) ;  impf. 
a-rinak  and  aor.  a-raik  (ric  leave) ;  aor.  a-var  (vr  cover) ; 
impf.  a-vrni  (vr  choose) ;  impf.  a-vrnak  (vrj  turn),  impf. 
a-vidhyat  (vyadh  ivound). 

1).  The  augment  contracts  with  the  initial  vowels  i,  u,  r 
to  the  Vrddhi  vowels  ai,  au,  ar  ;  e.  g.  aichat  impf.  of  is 
wish ;  aunat  impf.  of  ud  wet ;  ar-ta  (Gk.  S)p-To)  3.  s.  aor. 
mid.  of  r  go. 

c.  The  augment  is  very  often  dropped  :  this  is  doubtless 
a  survival  from  the  time  when  it  was  an  independent  particle 
that  could  be  dispensed  with  if  the  past  sense  was  clear  from 
the  context.  In  the  KV.  the  unaugmented  forms  of  past 
tenses  are  much  more  than  half  as  numerous  as  the  augmented 
ones.  In  sense  the  forms  that  drop  the  augment  are  either 
indicative  or  injunctive,  these  being  about  equal  in  number 
in  the  EV.  About  one-third  of  the  injunctives  in  the  EV. 
are  used  with  the  prohibitive  particle  ma  (Gk.  firj).  In  the 
AV.  nearly  all  the  unaugmented  forms  are  injunctives,  of 
which  four-fifths  are  used  with  ma. 

Reduplication. 

129.  Five  verbal  formations  take  reduplication :  the 
present  stem  of  the  third  conjugational  class,  the  perfect 
(with  the  pluperfect),  one  kind  of  aorist,  the  desiderative, 
and  the  intensive.  Each  of  these  has  certain  peculiarities, 
which  must  be  treated  separately  under  the  special  rules  of 
reduplication  (130,  135,  149,  170,  173).  Common  to  all  are 
the  following : 


1-29-130]  KEDU  PLICATION  123 

General  Rules  of  Reduplication. 

1.  The  lirst  syllable  of  a  root  (i.e.  that  portion  of  it  which 
ends  with  a  vowel)  ^  is  reduplicated ;  e.  g.  budh  jyerce'we : 
bu-budh. 

2.  Aspirated  letters  are  represented  by  the  corresponding 
unaspirated  ;  ■  e.  g.  bhi  fear :  bi-bhi  ;  dha  put :  da-dha. 

3.  Gutturals  are  represented  by  the  corresponding  palatals,'^ 
h  by  j ;  e.  g.  gam  go  :  ja-gam  ;  khan  dig  :  ca-khan  ;  han 
smite :  ja-ghan. 

4.  If  the  root  begins  with  more  than  one  consonant,  the 
lirst  only  is  reduplicated  ;  e.  g.  kram  stride :  ca-kram. 

5.  If  a  root  begins  with  a  sibilant  followed  by  a  hard 
consonant,  the  latter  is  reduplicated ;  e.  g.  stha  stand : 
ta-stha  ;  skand  leap  :  ca-skand.  But  svaj  embrace :  sa-svaj 
(v  is  soft) ;  smi  smile :  si-smi  (m  is  soft). 

6.  If  the  radical  vowel,  whether  final  or  medial,  is  long, 
it  is  shortened  in  the  reduplicative  syllable;^  e.g.  da  give: 
da-da  ;  radh  succeed  :  ra-radh. 

Special  Rule  of  Reduplication  for  the  Third  Class. 

130.  r  and  r  are  represented  in  reduplication  by  i ; 
e.  g.  bhr  hear :  bi-bhar-ti ;  pr  fill :  pi-par-ti.  The  root 
vrt  turn  is  the  only  exception :  va-vart(t)-i. 

a.  Thirteen  roots  also  reduplicate  a  with  i,*  while  nine  do  so  with  a. 


1  This  is  not  always  the  case  in  the  reduplication  of  intensives 
(173  6). 

"^  There  are  some  exceptions  to  this  rule  in  the  reduplication  of 
intensives  (173,  3). 

^  This  rule  does  not  apply  to  intensives  (173),  nor  for  the  most 
part  to  the  reduplicated  aorist  (149,  2),  and  in  the  reduplicated  perfect 
it  is  subject  to  numerous  exceptions  (13i),  9). 

*  Three  of  these,  pa  drink,  stha  stand,  han  slay,  have  permanently 
gone  over  to  the  a  conjugation,  while  ghra  smell  is  beginning  to  do  so. 


124  CONJUGATION  [131 

Terminations. 

131.  The  following  table  gives  the  terminations,  which 
are  on  the  whole  the  same  for  all  verbs,  of  the  present 
system.  The  chief  difference  is  in  the  optative  which  is 
characterized  by  e  ^  in  the  first,  and  ya  and  i '  in  the  second 
conjugation.  The  present  indicative  has  the  primary  (mi, 
si,  ti,  &c.),  and  the  imperfect,  the  optative,  and  (with 
some  modifications)  the  imperative  have  the  secondary 
terminations  (m,  s,  t,  &c.),  while  the  subjunctive  fluctuates 
between  the  two.  Of  the  other  tenses  the  future  takes  the 
primary,  and  the  pluperfect  and  the  aorist,  with  the 
benedictive  and  the  conditional,  take  the  secondary  termina- 
tions ;  while  the  perfect  has  in  the  active  (with  many 
variations)  the  secondary,  and  in  the  middle  the  primary 
endings. 

The  following  distinctions  between  the  two  conjugations 
should  be  noted.  In  the  first  or  a  conjugation  (as  in  the 
a  declension)  the  accent  is  never  on  the  terminations,  but 
always  on  the  same  syllable  of  the  stem  (the  root  in  the 
first  and  fourth,  the  affix  in  the  sixth  class),  which  therefore 
remains  unchanged.  On  the  other  hand,  in  the  second 
conjugation  (as  in  the  declension  of  changeable  stems)  the 
accent  falls  on  the  strong  stem,  which  is  reduced  in  the  weak 
forms  by  the  shifting  of  the  accent  to  the  endings.  In  the 
second  conjugation  therefore  the  endings  are  accented 
except  in  the  strong  forms  (126).  The  same  applies  to  the 
unaugmented  imperfect  (128). 


1  That  is,  i  coalescing  with  the  final  a  of  the  stem  ;  e.  g.  bbav-e 
—  bhava-i. 

2  That  is,  the  modal  affix  shows  vowel  gradation  (5  b). 


131] 


CONJUGATIONAL    ENDINGS 


Active. 


125 


PRESENT.          IMPERFECT. 

OPTATIVE, 

SUB.T. 

IMPV. 

1st  conj. 

2nd  conj. 

1.  mil 

(a)-m^ 

iyam " 

yam 

ani,  a 

2.  si 

s 

is 

yas 

a-si,  a-s 

— ,  tat^l 
dhi,  hi  J 

3.  ti 

t 

it 

yat 

a-ti,  a-t 

tu 

1.  vas' 

va^ 

iva 

yava 

a-va 

2.  thas 

tam 

itam 

yatam 

a-thas 

tam 

3.  tas 

tarn 

itam 

yatam 

a-tas 

tam 

1,  masi,'^  mas  ^ 

ma^ 

ima 

yama 

a-ma 

2.  tha,  thana^ 

ta,  tana'' 

ita 

yata 

a-tha 

ta,  tana  ^ 

3.  (a)-nti^ 

(a)-n,  ur " 

iyur 

yiir 

a-n 

(a)-ntu  * 

*  The  final  a  of  the  stem  in  the  first  conjugation  is  lengtliened  before 
m  or  V  :  bhdva-mi,  bhdva-vas. 

^  In  the  RV.  masi  is  more  than  five  times  as  common  as  mas,  but  in 
the  AV.  mas  is  rather  commoner  than  masi. 

^  The  only  example  of  the  ending  thana  in  the  a  conjugation  is 
vMa-thana. 

*  Reduplicated  verbs  and  others  treated  as  such  drop  the  n  in  the 
3.  pi.  ind.  pr.  and  impv.  act.  In  the  whole  second  conj.  the  n  is 
dropped  in  the  3.  pi.  pres.  impf,  imjJv.  mid. 

^  m  in  the  first  (d-bhava-m),  am  in  the  second  (5.-dves-am). 

"  There  are  no  examples  of  this  ending  in  the  a  conjugation. 

"^  The  ending  ur  is  taken  by  nearly  all  the  verbs  of  the  redupli- 
cating class  and  by  several  of  the  root  class. 

^  These  endings  coalesce  with  the  final  a  of  the  stem  to  eyam,  es, 
et,  &c. 

"  Verbs  of  the  a  conjugation  have  normally  no  ending  in  the 
2.  s.  impv.  ;  but  they  not  infrequently  add  tat,  which  occurs  in  B. 
also.  In  the  graded  conjugation  dhi,  hi,  tat  are  added  to  the  weak 
stem,  and  ana  in  some  verbs  of  the  ninth  class  :  e.  g.  ad-dhi,  ^rnu- 
dhi  ;  srnu-hi,  puni-hi  ;  as- ana  ;   vit-tat,  krnu-tat. 

'0  Only  two  examples  occur  in  the  a  conjugation  :  bhdja-tana  and 
n^hya-tana. 


126 


CONJUGATION 


[131 


Middle. 


PRESENT. 

1.  e 

2.  se 

3.  te 

1.  vahe' 

2.  ethe^(l), 

athe  (2) 

3.  ete'(l), 

ate  (2) 

1.  mahe' 

2.  dhve 

3.  iite(l), 

ate  (2) 


IMPF. 

thas 
ta 

vahi^ 

etham '  (1), 
atham  (2) 

etam^  (1), 
atam  (2) 

mahi^ 

dhvam 

nta  (1), 
ata  (2) 


OPTATIVE. 

iya* 

i-thas 

i-ta 

i-vahi 
i-y-atham 

i-y-atam 

i-mahi 

i-dhvam 
i-r-an 


SUBJUNCTIVE. 

I  a-se,  a-sai  ^ 
a-te,  a-tai*' 

a-vahai 
aithe 

aite 


a-mahai) 
a-mahe  ) 

a-dhvai 

a-ntaij^ 
a-nta^  J 


IMPERATI 


sva 


tain 
am 


etham  ^  (1 
atham  I 

etam^  (1) 
atam  (I 


dhvam 

ntam  (1) 
atam  (2) 


^  The  final  a  of  the  first  conjugation  is  lengthened  before  m  and  v. 

'^  This  i  combines  with  the  final  a  of  the  first  conjugation  to  e  : 
bhdve. 

^  In  these  forms  e  takes  the  place  of  the  final  a  of  the  a  conjugation. 

*  This  modal  i  combines  with  the  final  a  of  the  first  conjugation  to 
e  :  bhdveya,  &c. 

^  The  RV.  has  a-se  only,  the  AV.  and  the  Brahmanas  a-sai  only. 

"  The  form  a-te  is  almost  exclusively  used  in  the  RV.,  while  a-tai 
is  the  prevailing  one  in  the  AV.,  and  the  only  one  later. 

■^  The  ending  a-ntai  occurs  in  B.  only. 

^  The  form  in  a-nta  in  the  a  conjugation,  where  it  is  very  common, 
e.  g.  bhava-nta,  is  an  injunctive;  but  in  the  graded  conjugation  a 
subj.,  e.g.  krnav-a-nta  (inj.  krnvata). 


132]  CONJUGATIONAL   ENDINGS  127 

t 

Paradigms. 

132.  Since  the  three  classes  of  the  first  conjugation,  as 
well  as  all  the  secondary  verbs  the  stems  of  which  end  in  a, 
are  inflected  exactly  alike,'  one  paradigm  will  suffice  for  all 
of  them.  The  injunctive  is  not  given  here  because  its  forms  ^ 
are  identical  with  the  unaugmented  imperfect.  Forms  of 
which  no  examples  are  found  in  the  Samhitas  are  added  in 
square  brackets. 


'  All  other  conjugational  stems  ending  in  a,  the  passive  (154),  the 
8  futui-e  (151),  the  a  (141  a),  the  sa  (147),  and  the  reduplicated  (149) 
aor.  are  similarly  inflected. 


128 


CONJUGATION 


[132 


FIRST   CONJUGATION. 


SINGULAR. 

1.  bhava-mi 

2.  bhava-si 

3.  bhava-ti 


First  Class  :   bhu  he 


Present. 

Active. 

DUAL. 

bhava-vas 

bhava-thas 
bhava-tas 


PLURAL. 

fbhava-masi 

(bhava-mas 

bhava-tha 

bhava-nti 


1.  a-bhava-m 

2.  a-bhava-s 

3.  a-bhava-t 


2.  bhava       ) 
bhava-tat) 

3.  bhava-tu 


Imperfect. 

fa-bhava-va] 
a-bhava-tam 
a-bhava-tam 

Imperative. 

bhava-tam 
bhava-tam 


a-bhava-ma 

a-bhava-ta 

a-bhava-n 


bhava-ta 
bhava-ntu 


1.  bhava-ni 
bhava 

2.  bhava-si  \ 
bhava-s   ) 

3.  j  bhava-ti 
(bhava-t 


1.  bhav-eyam 

2.  bhav-es 


o 


bhav-et. 


Subjunctive. 

bhava-va 

bhava-thas 
bhava-tas 

Optative. 

[bhav-eva] 
[  bhav-etam] 
bhav-etam 

Participle, 
bhav-ant,  f.  -i 


bhava-ma 

bhava-tha 
bhava-n 


bhav-ema 

[bhav-eta  | 
bhav-eyur 


132] 


FIRST  CLASS 


129 


FIRST    CONJUGATION. 

Present  stem  bhav-a. 

Middle. 
Present. 


SINGULAR. 

DUAL. 

PLURAL. 

bhav-e 

bhava-vahe 

bhava-mahe 

bhava-se 
bhava-te 

bhav-ethe 
bhav-ete 

Imperfect. 

bhava-dhve 
bhava-nte 

a-bhav-e 

a-bhava-thas 

a-bhava-ta 

a-bhava-vahi 

a-bhav-etham 

a-bhav-etam 

Imperative. 

a-bhava-mahi 

a-bhava-dhvam 

a-bhava-nta 

bhava-sva 
bhava-tam 

bhav-etham 
bhav-etam 

bhava-dhvam 
bhava-ntam 

bhav-ai 
I  bhava-se 

Ibhava-sai  (AV.) 

(bhava-te 

|bhava-tai 


Subjunctive.^/^  0/7  6At 
bhava-vahai  bhava-mahai 

bhav-aithe  [bhava-dhve] 

bhav-aite  [bhava-nte] 


bhdv-eya 

[bhav-ethas] 
bhdv-eta 


Optative. 

bhav-e  vahi 
[bhav-eyatham  j 
[bhav-eyatam] 


bhav-emahi 
fbhav-edhvamj 
[bhav-eran] 


1S19 


Participle, 
bhava-mana,  f.  a 

K 


180 


SINGULAR 

1. 

6-mi 

2. 

6-si 

n. 

6-ti 

1. 

ay-am 

2. 

ai-s 

CONJUGATION  [132 

SECOND   CONJUGATION. 

Second  Class '.  i  go:  Present  stem  e,  i. 
Active. 
Present. 

DUAL.  PLURAL. 

[i-vas] 
i-thas 
i-tas 


3.  ai-t 


ji-hi 
ti-ta 


tat 


3.    6-tu 


oil,?      ^-fr-vVT-.-*^ 


1. 

2. 
3. 


Imperfect. 

[ai-va] 
ai-tam 


ai-tam 

Imperative, 
i-tam 

i-tam 
Subjunctive. 


Optative. 


\i 


i-masi 
mas 
i-tha 
i-thana 
y-anti 


ai-ma 
ai-ta 
ai-tana 
ay- an 


A.0?;^ 


y-dntu 


I  ay-ani 
lay-a 

dy-a-va 

ay-a-ma 

jay-a-si 
lay-a-s 

dy-a-thas 

dy-a-tha 

fay-a-ti 

dy-a-tas 

ay-a-n 

jay-a-t 

1.  i-yam 

i-ya-va 

i-ya-ma 

2.  i-ya-s 

i-ya-tam 

i-ya-ta 

3.  i-ya-t 

i-ya-tam 

Participle. 

y-ant,  f.  y-at-i 

i-yur 

13-2] 


SECOND    CLASS 


181 


SECOND    CONJUGATION. 

bru  speah :  Present  stem  brav,  bru. 

Middle. 

Present. 

SINGULAR. 

DUAL. 

PLURAL. 

bruv-6 

bru-vahe] 

bru-mahe 

bru-s6 

bruv-athe 

bru-dhv6 

jbru-t6 
( bruv-6 

bruv-ate 

Imperfect. 

bruv-ate 

a-bruv-i 
a-brii-thas 

a-bru-vahi 
a-bruv-atham 

|a-bru-mahi 
a-bru-dhvam 

a-bru-ta 

a-bruv-atam 
Imperative. 

a-bruv-ata 

bru-sva 

bruv-atham 

bru-dhvam 

bru-tam 

bruv-atam 
Subjunctive. 

bruv-atam 

brav-ai 

brav-a-vahai 

brav-a-mahai 

brav-a-se 

brav-aithe 

brav-a-dhve] 

brav-a-te 

brav-aite 

brav-a-nta 

Optative. 

bruv-i-ya 
[bruv-i-thas 
bruv-i-ta 

"bruv-i-vahi 

bruv-i-yatham 

bruv-i-yatam' 

Participle. 

bi*uv-ana,  i'.  a 

bruv-i-mahi 
[bruv-i-dhvam 
bruv-i-ran 

K 


132 


CONJUGATION 


[132 


Third  Class  :  bhr  hear 


2. 
3. 


SINGULAR. 


bibhar-mi 

bibhar-si 
bibhar-ti 


a-bibhar-am 
a-bibhar  (28) 

a-bibhar  (28) 


2.  jbibhr-hi 
Ibibhr-tat 


bibhar-tu 


Active. 
Present. 

DUAL. 

[bibhr-vas] 

bibhr-thas 
bibhr-tas 

Imperfect. 

[a-bibhr-va] 
a-bibhr-tam 

a-bibhr-tam 

Imperative, 
bibhr-tam 

bibhr-tam 

Subjunctive. 


PLURAL. 

jbibhr-masi 
( bibhr-mas 
bibhr-tha 
bibhr-ati 


a-bibhr-ma 
ja-bibhr-ta 
(a-bibhr-tana 
a-bibhr-an 
a-bibhar-ur 


f  bibhr-ta 
1  bibhr-tana 

bibhr-atu 


1. 
2. 
8. 


bibhar-ani 
bibhar-a-s 
bibhar-a-t 


[bibhar-a-va] 
bibhar-a-thas 
[bibhar-a-tas] 


bibhar-a-ma 
[bibhar-a-thaj 
bibhar-a-n 


1.  bibhr-yam 

2.  bibhr-ya-s 
8.  bibhr-ya-t 


Optative. 

[bibhr-ya-va] 
[bibhr-ya-tam] 
bibhr-ya-tam 

Participle, 
bibhr-at,  f.  bibhr-at-i 


bibhr-ya-ma 
[bibhr-ya-ta] 
bibhr-yiir 


132J  THIRD  CLASS 

Present  stem  bibhar,  bibhr. 

Middle. 
Present. 

DUAL. 

bibhr-valie 


133 


SINGULAR. 

bibhr-e 


bibhr-se 
bibhr-te 


bibhr-athe 
bibhr-ate 


PLURAL. 

bibhr-mahe 

bibhr-dhve 
bibhr-ate 


[a-bibhr-i] 
a-bibhr-thas 

a-bibhr-ta 


Imperfect. 

a-bibhr-vahi] 
[a-bibhr-atham] 


[a-bibhr-mahi] 
[a-bibhr-dhvam] 


[a-bibhr-atamj  a-bibhr-ata 


bibhr- sva 


Imperative. 

bibhr-atham 


bibhr-dhvara 


bibhr-tam 


[bibhr-atamj 


bibhr-atam 


Subjunctive. 


rbibhar-ai] 
bibhar-a-se 
bibhar-a-te 


bibhar-a-vahai 
[bibhar-aithe] 
[bibhar-aite] 


bibhar-  a-mahai 
[bibhar-a-dhve] 
bibhar-a-nta 


bibhr-iya 
[bibhr-i-thas] 
bibhr-i-ta 


Optative. 

[bibhr-i-vahij 
[bibhr-i-yatham  ] 
[bibhr-i-yatam] 

Participle. 

bibhr-ana,  f.  a 


bibhr-i-mahi 
[bibhr-i-dhvamj 
bibhi'-i-ran 


134 


CONJUGATION 


[132 


Fifth  Class :  kr  make  : 


SINGULAR, 


1. 

2. 
3. 


kr-n6-mi 

kr-no-si 
kr-no-ti 


1. 

a-krnav-am 

2. 

a-krno-s 

3. 

a-krno-t 

I  krnu-hi 

2.  i  krnii 

*  •        -i 
krnu-tat 

*        •    • 

3.  [krno-tu] 


1.  krnu-yam 

2.  [krnu-ya-s] 

3.  krnu-y  a-t 


Active. 
Present. 

DUAL. 

[krn-vas] 

krnu-thas 
krnu-tas 

Imperfect. 

[a-krn-va] 
a-krnu-tam 
a-krnu-tam 

Imperative, 
krmi-tam 

krnu-tam 
Subjunctive. 


PLURAL. 

krn-masi 
krn-mas 
krnu-tha 
krnv-anti 


[a-krn-ma] 
a-krnu-ta 
a-krnv-an 


I  krnu-ta 
\  krno-ta 
( krno-tana 
krnv-antu 


1. 

1  krnav-a 
krnav-ani 

krnav-a-va 

krnav-a-ma 

2. 

krnav-a-s 

krnav-a-thas 

krnav-a-tha 

3. 

krnav-a-t 

krnav-a-tas 

_       •    • 

krnav-a-n 

Optative. 

[krnu-ya-va] 

[krnu-ya-tam] 

[krnu-ya-tam] 

Participle. 


krnu-ya-ma 
[krnu-ya-ta] 
[krnu-yur] 


krnv-ant,  f.  krnv-at-i 


13-2] 


FIFTH   CLASS 


135 


Present  stem  kr-no,  kr-nu. 

Middle. 


SINGULAR. 

krnv-6 

krnu-s6 
j  krnu-t6 
ikrnv-6 


[a-krnv-i] 
a-kmu-thas 
a-krnii-ta 


krnu-sva 


Present. 

DUAL. 

[krn-vahej 

krnv-athe 
[krnv-ate  ] 


Imperfect. 

fa-krn-vahij 
a-lirnv-atham] 
a-krnv-atam.] 

Imperative. 

krnv-atham 


PLURAL. 

krn-mahe 

krnu-dhv6j 
krnv-ate 


a-krn-mahi  I 

a-krnvi-dhvam 

a-krnv-ata 


krnu-dhvam 


krnu-tam 


rkrnv-atam  1 


krnv-atam 


Subjunctive. 


krnav-ai 

krnav-a-se 
krnav-a-te 


krnav-a-vahai 

krnav-aithe 
krnav-aite 


krnav-a-mahai 

[krnav-a-dhve] 
krnav-a-nta 


[krnv-iya] 
[krnv-i-thas] 
krnv-i-ta 


Optative. 

[krnv-i-vahij 

[krnv-i-yathamj 

[krnv-i-yatam] 

Participle. 


[krnv-i-mahi] 

[krnv-i-dhvam] 

[krnv-i-ran] 


krnv-ana,  f.  a 


KiG 


CONJUGATION 


[132 


1. 
2. 
3. 


SINGULAR. 


yu-na-j-mi 
yu-na-k-si  (63,  67) 
yu-na-k-ti  (63) 


Seventh  Class :  yuj  join : 


Active. 
Present. 

DUAL. 

[yunj-vas] 
I  yunk-thas] 
[yunk-tas] 


PLURAL. 

yunj-mas 

[yunk-tha] 

yufij-anti 


1. 

2. 
8. 

a-yunaj-am] 
a-yunak  (63,  61) 
a-yunak  (63,  61) 

Imperfect. 

[a-yiinj-va] 
a-yunk-tam 
[a-yunk-tam] 


[a-yunj-ma 

[a-yunk-ta 

a-yunj-an 


2.     yun-dhi  (10  ft) 
3. 


yunak-tu 


Imperative. 

yun-tam(10(?)  (yun-ta 

(yunak-ta,-taua 


yun-tam 


yunj-antu 


Subjunctive. 


1. 
2. 
8. 


[yunaj-ani] 
yunaj-a-s 
yunaj-a-t 


yunaj-a-va  yunaj-a-ma 

[yunaj-a-thas]    [yunaj-a-tha] 
yunaj-a-tas         yunaj-a-n 


1.  [yuSj-yam] 

2.  [yunj-ya-s] 
8.    yunj-ya-t 


Optative. 

[yunj-ya-va]         [yunj-ya-ma] 
[yunj-ya-tam]      [yunj-ya-ta] 
[yunj-ya-tam]      [yunj-yiir] 

Participle. 

yuflj-aut,  f.  yunj-at-i 


132] 

Present  stem : 

SINGULAR. 

yunj-6 

yunk-se 

yunk-t6 


SEVENTH   CLASS 

yu-na-j,  yu-n-j. 

Middle. 
Present. 

DUAL. 

[yunj-yahe] 
yunj-athe 
yuSj-ate 


137 


PLURAL. 

[yunj-mahe] 
yung-dhv6 
yunj-ate 


a-yunj-i] 

a-yunk-thas] 

a-yunk-ta] 


Imperfect. 

a-yunj-vahi] 

a-yunj-atham] 

a-yunj-atam] 


Imperative. 

yunk-sva  (63,  67)     yunj-atham 


yun-tam 


[yuJQj-atam] 


[a-yufij-mahi] 
[  a-yiing-dhvam] 
a-yunj-ata 


yung-dhvam 
yunj-atam 


Subjunctive. 


[yunaj-ai] 
[yunaj-a-se] 
yunaj-a-te 


[yunaj-a-vahai] 

[yunaj-aithe] 

[yunaj-aite] 


yunaj-a-mahai 
[yunaj-a-dhve] 
[yunaj-a-nta] 


fyunj-iya] 
[yunj-i-thas] 
yunj-i-ta 


Optative. 

[yvinj-i-vahi] 

[yunj-i-yatham] 

[yunj-i-yatam] 

Participle. 

yunj-ana,  f.  a 


[yiinj-i-mahi] 

[yunj-i-dhvam] 

[yunj-i-ran] 


\  -  0 


138 


,)c(^ 


CONJUGATION  [132 

Ninth  Class  :  grabh  seise : 
Active. 


SINGULAR. 


Present. 

DUAL. 


PLURAL. 


1. 

2. 
3. 

grbh-na-mi 

grbh-na-si 

grbh-na-ti 

"grbh-ni-vas 
grbh-ni-thas 
grbh-ni-tas 

grbh-ni-masi 
grbh-ni-mas 
j  grbh-ni-tha 
( grbh-ni-thana 
grbh-n-anti 

Imperfect. 

1. 
2. 
3. 

a-grbh-na-m 

a-grbh-na-s 

a-grbh-na-t 

[a-grbh-ni-va" 
a-grbh-ni-tam 
[a-grbh-ni-tam 

a-grbh-ni-ma 

a-grbh-ni-ta 

a-grbh-n-an 

2. 

grbh-ni-hi 
-  grbh-ni-tat 
grbh-ana 

Imperative, 
grbh-ni-tam 

f  grbh-ni-ta 
[  grbh-ni-tana 

.1 
o. 

grbh-na-tu 

grbh-ni-tam 

grbh-n-antu 

1.  grbh-n-ani 

2.  grbh-na-s 

3.  fgrbh-na-t 
1  grbh-na-ti 


1.  grbh-ni-yam 

2.  grbh-ni-ya-s 

3.  grbh-ni-ya-t 


Subjunctive. 

[grbh-na-va] 

[grbh-na-thas] 

[grbh-na-tas] 


grbh-na-ma 
grbh-na-tha 
grbh-na-n 


Optative. 

[grbh-ni-ya-va]  [grbh-ni-ya-ma] 

[  grbh-ni-ya-tam]  [grbh-ni-ya-taj 

[grbh-ni-ya-tam]  [grbh-ni-yiirj 


Participle. 

grbh-n-ant.  f.  grbh-n-at-i. 


132]  NINTH   CLASS 

Present  stem  grbh-na,  grbh-ni,  grbh-n. 

Middle. 
Present. 

DUAL. 

[grbh-ni-vahe] 

[grbh-n-athe] 

[grbh-n-ate] 


139 


SINGULAR. 

grbh-n-6 

grbh-ni-se 

grbh-ni-te 


PLUEAL. 

grbh-ni-mahe 
[grbh-ni-dhv6] 
grbh-n-ate 


a-grbh-n-i 
[a-grbh-ni-thas] 
a-grbh-ni-ta 


Imperfect. 

a-  grbh-  ni- vahi] 

a-grbh-n-atham] 

a-grbh-n-atamj 


a-grbh-ni-mahi 
[a-grbh-nx-dh.vam 
a-grbh-n-ata 


grbh-ni-sva 


Imperative. 

[grbh-n-atham] 


grbh-ni-dhvam 


grbh-ni-tam  [grbh-n-atam]  grbh-n-atam 


I  grbh-n-ai] 

[grbh-na-se] 

[grbh-na-te] 


Subjunctive. 

grbh-na- vahai 

[grbh-n-aithe] 
[grbh-n-aite] 


grbh-na-mahai 

[  grbh-na-dhve] 
[grbh-na-nta] 


[grbh-n-iya] 
[grbh-n-ithas] 
grbh-n-ita 


Optative. 

[grbh-n-i-vahi]         [grbh-n-i-mahi] 
[grbh-n-i-yatham]  [grbh-n-i-dhvam] 
grbh-n-i-yatam]     [grbh-n-i-ran] 

Participle. 

grbh-n-ana,  f.  a 


140  CONJUGATION  [133 

Irregularities  of  the  Present   Stem. 

First  Conjugation. 

133.  A.  First  or  Bhu  Class.  1.  The  radical  vowel  is 
lengthened  in  guh  hide  and  in  kram  sfride  (in  the  act.  only) : 
gxiha,'  krama-ti  (but  mid.  krama-te) ;  uh  consider  takes 
Guna:  6h-a;-  krp  lament  does  not  take  Guna:  krp-a.^ 

2.  gam  go,  yam  restrain,  yu  separate  form  their  present 
stems  with  cha  (Gk.  cr/c) :  ga-cha  (Gk.  /3a-o-/c&)),  ya-eha, 
yu-eha. 

3.  a.  The  four  roots  pa  drinl;  stha  stand,  sac  accompany, 
sad  sit  form  present  stems  that  originally  belonged  to  the 
reduplicating  class :  piba  (Lat.  hiho) ;  tistha  {icrTr]-/xL,  Lat. 
sisto);  sasca^  (for  sa-s(a)c-a);  sida  (for  si-s(a)cl-a  ;  Lat  sldo). 

h.  Four  stems  are  transfers  from  the  fifth  or  nu  class, 
being  either  used  beside  or  having  entirely  superseded  the 
simpler  original  stems :  i-nv-a-ti  (from  i  send)  beside  i-no-ti  ; 
ji-nv-a-ti  (from  ji  quicJcen)  beside  ji-no-si ;  hi-nv-a-ti  (from 
hi  impel]  beside  hi-no-ti  ;  pi-nv-a  fatten,  doubtless  originally 
pi-nu  (-/pi). 

4.  dams  bite  and  sanj  hang  lose  their  nasal :  das-a,  saj-a. 

5.  The  ending  tat  (besides  being  regularly  used  in  the 

2.  s.  impv.  by  twelve  verbs)  is  exceptionally  used  for  the 

3.  s.  in  gaeha-tat  and  smara-tat.  Only  one  example  occurs, 
in  this  class,  of  the  2.  pi.  impv.  act.  ending  tana:  bhaja- 
tana ;  and  one  of  dhva  (for  dhvam)  in  the  2.  pi,  mid. : 
yaja-dhva. 


^  Instead  of  taking  Guna. 
'^  But  uh  remove  remains  unchanged  (125,  1). 
3  Against  125,  1. 

*  A  reminiscence  of  the  reduplicative  origin  of  tliis  stem  is  the  loss 
of  the  nasal  in  tlie  3.  ]il.  prcs.  sasc-ati  and  3.  \>\.  Inj.  mid.  sasc-ata. 


133-134]  IREEGULAEITIES  OF  PRESENT  SYSTEM    141 

B.  Fourth  or  Ya  Class.  1.  The  radical  syllable  is 
reduced  in  seven  verbs:  spas  sec  loses  its  initial:  pas-ya ; 
vyadh  pierce  takes  Samprasarana  :  vidh-ya  ;  a  is  shortened 
in  dha  suck :  dha-ya ;  ma  exchange  :  ma-ya ;  va  weave : 
va-ya ;  vya  envelope :  vya-ya  ;  hva  call :  hva-ya. 

2.  Final  r  sometimes  becomes  both  ir  and  ur :  jr  waste 
away:  jur-ya  and  jir-ya(AV.) ;  tv  cross:  tilr-ya  and  tir-ya  ; 
pr  fill  becomes  piir-ya  only  (because  of  its  initial  labial). 

3.  sram  lie  weary  lengthens  its  vowel :  sram-ya ;  in  B. 
tarn  faint  and  mad  he  exhilarated  do  the  same :  tam-ya, 
mad-ya. 

C.  Sixth  Class.  1.  The  radical  vowel  is  nasalized  in 
eight  verbs :  krt  cut :  krnt-a ;  trp  he  pleased :  trmp-a ; 
pis  adorn  :  pims-a  ;  muc  release :  munc-a  ;  lip  smear : 
limp-a  ;  Iw^hreal::  lump-a  ;  Yxdifind:  vind-a  ;  sic  sprinMe : 
sinc-a.  Three  other  roots,  tud  thrust,  drh  malce  firm,  subh 
shine  have  occasional  nasalized  forms. 

2.  Four  roots  form  their  present  stem  with  the  suffix  cha 
{cp.  A  2) :  is  tvish  :  i-cha  :  v  go:  r-cha  ;  pras  ash :  pr-eha  ;  ^ 
vas  shine :  u-cha.  The  root  vrasc  cut,  which  seems  to  be 
formed  with  c,'  takes  Samprasarana  :  vrsc-a. 

3.  Three  roots  in  r,  kr  scatter,  gr  swallow,  tr  cross,  form 
the  present  stems  kir-a,  gir-a,  tir-a  (beside  tar-a). 

a.  Beside  the  normal  use  of  the  imperative  suffix  tat  for  the  2.  s.  in 
mrdd-tat,  visa-tat,  vrha-tat,  suva-tat,  it  also  appears  for  the  3.  s.  in 
vis^-tat. 

134.    A.  Second  or  Root  Class. 

1.  The  root  is  irregularly  strengthened  in  the  following 
verbs : 

a.  ksnu  irhet,  yu  unite,  nu  and  stu  praise  take  Vrddhi 
instead  of  Guna  in   the  strong  forms  before  terminations 


^  With  Samprasarana  and  loss  of  s.     Cp.  Lat.  prec-or  and  po{rc)-sco, 
and  Old  German/ragf-en  '  ask '  and  for-scon  {forschen). 

'^  Cp.  -vras-ka  culling,  past  participle  vrk-nft  cut,  and  vfk-a  wolf. 


142  CONJUGATION  [134 

beginning  with  consonants ;  ^  e,  g.  stau-mi,  a-stau-t,  but 
a-stav-am. 

h.  mrj  ivipe  takes  Vrddhi  in  the  strong  forms  :  marj-mi, 
mars-ti,  but  mrj-mas,  mrj-anti. 

c.  si  lie  mid.  takes  Guna  and  accents  the  radical  syllable 
throughout  its  weak  forms :  e.  g.  s.  1.  3.  say-e,  2.  s6-se 
{KH-a-ai).  It  has  the  additional  irregularity  of  inserting  r 
before  the  endings  in  the  3.  pi.  pr.,  impv.,  impf.  :  s6-r-ate, 
s6-r-atam,  a-se-r-an. 

a.  i  go,  bru  siKak,  stu  j^raise,  han  slaij  before  the  ending  of  the  2.  pi. 
impv.  act.  have  the  alternative  forms  6-ta  and  6-tana,  bravi-tana,st6-ta, 
hdn-tana.  Bru  has  the  same  irregularity  in  the  2.  pi.  impf.  abravi-ta 
and  ^bravi-tana. 

2.  The  root  is  irregularly  weakened  in  the  following 
verbs : 

a.  vas  desire  takes  Samprasarana  in  the  weak  forms : 
1.  pi.  us-masi,  part,  us-ana,  but  1.  s.  vas-mi. 

h.  as  be  drops  its  initial  a  in  the  optative  and  all  the  weak 
forms  of  the  pr.  and  impv. ;  e.  g.  opt.  s-yat  would  be ; 
pr.  s-mas  we  are,  s-anti  (Lat.  sunt)  they  are ;  impv.  du.  2. 
s-tam,  pi.  2.  s-ta,  3.  s-antu.  The  2.  s.  impv.  preserves  the 
vowel  (in  an  altered  form)  in  e-dhi  (for  az-dhi,  Av.  zdi). 
In  the  impf.  it  inserts  i  before  the  endings  of  the  2.  3.  s,  : 
as-i-s,  as-i-t  (beside  as  —  as-t). 

c.  han  slay  in  weak  forms  loses  its  n  before  terminations 
beginning  with  consonants  (except  m,  y,  v),  as  ha-tha,  but 
han-ti.  In  the  3.  pi.  pr.,  impv.,  impf.,  and  part.,  the  a  is 
syncopated  and  h  reverts  to  the  original  guttural  gh: 
ghn-anti,  ghn-antu,  a-ghn-an ;  ghn-ant.  The  2.  s.  impv. 
is  ja-hi  (for  jha-hi),  with  palatalized  initial  instead  of 
gha-hi. 


1  In  B.  ru  cry,  su  impel,  sku  tear,  snu  distil  liave  the  same  peculiarity  : 
rau-ti,  sau-ti,  skaii-ti,  snau-ti. 


134]    IRREGULARITIES  OF  THE  SECOND  STEM    143 

3.  A  vowel  or  semivowel  is  irregularly  inserted  in  the 
following  verbs : 

a.  The  roots  an  breatJie,  rud  weep,  vam  vomit,  svas  blow, 
svap  sleejJ  insert  i  before  all  terminations  beginning  with 
a  consonant,  except  in  the  2.  3.  s.  impf.,  where  they  insert  i  ; 
e.  g.  an-i-ti,  an-i-t ;  a-vam-i-t ;  svas-i-ti. 

b.  The  roots  id  praise  and  is  rule  add  i  in  some  forms  of 
the  2.  s.  and  pi,  mid. :  id-i-sva ;  is-i-se  (beside  ik-se), 
Isi-dhve.  Occasional  forms  (2.  s.  inipv.)  with  connecting  i 
from  other  roots  also  occur :  jan-i-sva  he  born,  vas-i-sva 
clothe,  snath-i-hi  pierce,  stan-i-hi  thunder. 

c.  The  root  bru  S2)eaJi  inserts  i  in  the  strong  forms 
before  terminations  beginning  with  consonants:  brav-i-mi, 
a-brav-i-t ;  am  injure  inserts  i  before  consonants ;  thus 
am-i-ti,  am-i-sva,  am-i-t  (TS.). 

4.  With  regard  to  the  endings  : 

a.  The  root  sas  order  loses  the  n  in  the  3.  pi.  act.  and 
mid.,  and  in  the  part. :  sas-ate,  sas-atu,  sas-at. 

b.  The  root  duh  niilk  is  very  anomalous  in  its  endings. 
The  irregular  forms  are  the  following:  act.  impf.  3.  s. 
a-duh-a-t  beside  a-dhok,  3.  pi.  a-duh-ran  beside  a-duh-an 
and  duh-iir ;  opt.  3.  s.  duh-iyat  (for  duh-yat),  3.  pi. 
duh-i-yan  (for  duh-yiir).  Mid.  pr.  ind.  3.  pi.  duh-r6  and 
duh-rate  beside  the  regular  duh-at6  ;  ^  impv.  3.  s.  duh-am,^ 
3.  pi.  dnh-ram  and  duh-ratam  ;  part,  dugh-ana. 

e.  Roots  ending  in  a  take  ur  instead  of  an  in  the  3.  pi.  impf. 
Uct. ;  e.g.  ^Bb protect :  a-p-ur.  A  few  roots  ending  in  consonants 
show  the  same  irregularity  ;  e.  g.  tvis  be  stirred:  a-tvis-ur. 

a.  The  vei'bs  is  7-ule,  duh  milk,  vid  ,find,  si  lie  frequently,  and  cit 
observe,  brii  speak  rarely,  take  e  instead  of  te^  in  the  3.  s.  pr.  mid. :  is-e, 
duh-6,  vid-6,  iiy-e  ;  cit-6,  bruv-6. 

p.  In  the  AV.  and  B.  subj.  forms  with  a  instead  of  a  are  r.ot  un- 
common ;  e.  g.  £y-a-s,  fis-a-t,*  brd.v-a-thaR,  h4n-a-tha,  dd-a-n. 

^  But  with  irregular  accent,  as  also  rih-al6  they  lick. 

2  In  the  AV.  the  3.  s.  impv.  mid.  is  similarly  formed  in  ^ay-am. 

^  This  irregularity  occurs  in  B.  also. 

*  In  B.  subj.  forms  with  primary  endings  are  very  rai'e. 


144  CONJUGATION  [134 

B.    Third  or  Reduplicating  Class. 

1.  Roots  ending  in  a  drop  the  radical  vowel  before 
terminations    beginning   with   vowels ;    e.  g.   ma    measure : 

1.  s.  mim-e,  3.  pi.  mim-ate. 

a.  The  a  of  ma  measure,  ma  helloir,  ra  give,  sa  sharpen, 
ha  go  away  is  in  weak  forms  usually  changed  to  i  before  con- 
sonants (cp.  5  c) :  mimi-te ;  rari-thas  ;  ^  sisi-masi  ;  jihi-te. 

6.  da  give,  dha  place,  the  two  commonest  verbs  in  this 
class,  use  dad  and  dadh  as  their  stems  in  all  weak  forms  : 
dad-mahe,  dadh-masi.  When  the  aspiration  of  dadh  is 
lost  before  t,  th,  s  it  is  thrown  back  on  the  initial :  dhat-te, 
dhat-tha,  dhat-sva.  The  2.  s.  impv.  act.  is  de-hi  (for 
daz-dhi)  beside  dad-dhi  and  dat-tat ;  and  dhe-hi  (for 
dhaz-dhi)  beside  dhat-tat. 

2.  The  root  vyac  takes  Samprasarana,  e.  g.  3.  du.  pr. 
vivik-tas  ;  hvar  he  crooked  makes  some  forms  with 
Samprasarana  and  then  reduplicates  with  u :  e.g.  ju-hur-thas, 

2.  s.  inj.  mid. 

3.  bhas  chew,  sac  accompany,  has  laugh  syncopate  the 
radical  vowel  in  weak  forms  ;  thus  ba-ps-ati  3  pi.  ind.  pr. 
(but  ba-bhas-a-t  3.  s.  subj.) ;  sa-sc-ati  3.  pi.  ind.  pr., 
sa-sc-ata  3.  pi.  inj. ;  ja-ks-at  (for  3a-gh(a)s-at)  pr.  part. 

a.  The  roots  r  go,  da  give,  dha  put,  pr  cross,  yu  separate,  sa  sharpen,  hu 
sacrifice  have  sevei-al  forms  with  a  strong  vowel  in  the  2.  impv.  act.  s. 
yu-yo-dhi,  si-sa-dhi  (beside  si-;§i-hi);  du.  yu-yo-tam  (beside  yu-yu- 
t&m);  pi.  i-y-ar-ta,  dd.-da-ta  and  d^-da-tana,  dd,-dha-ta  and  dd,-dha- 
tana,  pi-par-tana,  yu-yo-ta  and  yu-yo-tana,  ju-ho-ta  and  ju-ho-tana, 
da,  dha,  ha  leave,  have  similar  strong  forms  in  the  2.  pi.  impf.  :  a-da- 
da-ta,  S-dadha-ta,  a-jaha-tana. 

p.  There  are  numerous  transfers  from  this  to  other  classes.  The 
roots  pa  drink,  stha  stand,  han  stride  form  such  stems  according  to  the 
a  conjugation  exclusively,  piba,  tistha,  jfghna  (cp.  133  A.  3  a) ;  while 
ghra  smell,  bhas  cliexo,  ma  helloiv,  ra  give,  sac  accowpany  occasionally  use 
the  a  stems  jighra,  b^psa,  mima,  rd.ra,  sdsca.  The  roots  da  give  and 
dha  put  also  make  some  forms  from  their  weak  stems  according  to  the 

'  But  2.  s.  imjw.  act.  rara-sva  (AV.). 


1:34]     IRREGULARITIES  OF  PRESENT  SYSTEM     145 

a  conjugation,  as  3.  s.  pr.  mid.  diid-a-te,  3.  pi.  act,  dd.dh-a-nti,  3.  pi. 
impv.  d^dh-a-ntu.  The  former,  dad,  has  even  an  incipient  tendency 
to  become  a  root ;  thus  it  forms  the  past  part.  pass,  dat-td  given. 

C.  Fifth  or  Nu  Class.  1.  The  u  of  the  suffix  is  dropped 
before  the  m  of  the  1.  pi.  ind.  act.  and  raid.,  as  krn-mas, 
krn-mahe. 

2.  When  nu  is  preceded  by  a  consonant  its  u  becomes  uv 
before  vowel  ^endings ;  e.  g.  3.  pi.  pr.  as-nuv-anti  (but 
sii-nv-anti). 

3.  sru  hear  forms  (by  dissimilation)  the  stem  sr-nu,  and 
vr  cover  (with  interchange  of  vowel  and  semivowel)  iir-nu 
beside  the  regular  vr-nu, 

4.  Beside  the  regular  and  very  frequent  present  stem 
kr-nu  ^  (from  kr  maA'e)  there  begins  to  appear  in  the  tenth 
Mandala  of  the  RV.  the  very  anomalous  kuru.^  The  strong 
form  of  this  stem,  karo,  which  has  the  fui-ther  anomaly  of 
Gruna  in  the  root,  first  aj^pears  in  the  AV.^ 

a.  The  four  roots  ending  in  n,  tan  stretch,  man  think,  van  win,  san 
gain,  have  the  appearance  of  forming  their  stem  with  the  suffix  u,  as 
tan-vi.  These  (with  three  later  roots)  form  a  separate  (eighth)  class 
according  to  the  Hindu  grammarians.  But  the  a  of  these  present 
stems  in  reality  probably  represents  the  sonant  nasal,  =  tn-nu.  This 
group  was  joined  by  kur-u,  the  late  and  anomalous  present  stem  of 
kr  make  (cp.  C  4). 

j8.  Five  stems  of  this  class,  i-nu,  r-nu,  ji-nu,  pi-nu,  hi-nu,  have 
come  to  be  used  frequently  as  secondaiy  roots  forming  present  stems 
according  to  the  a  conjugation  :  inv-a,  rnv-a,  jfnv-a,  pfnv-a,  hinv-a. 

7.  In  the  3.  pi.  pr.  mid.  six  verbs  of  this  class  take  the  ending  re* 
with  connecting  vowel  i  :  iiav-i-r^,  rnv-i-r6,  pinv-i-re,  srnv-i-r§, 
sunv-i-r6,  hinv-i-r6. 


1  After  the  preposition  pari  around  this  stem  prefixes  an  unoriginal 
s  :  pari-s-krnv-dnti  theij  adorn. 

2  Twice  in   the   2.  s.  impv.  kuru  and  once  in  the  1.  pi.  pr.  ind. 
kur-mas. 

■'  But  the  forms  made  from  krnu  are  still  six  times  as  common  in 
the  AV.  as  those  from  karo,  kuru,  which  are  the  only  stems  used  in  B. 
*  Like  duh-re  in  the  root  class. 

181U  L 


146  CONJUGATION  [m-i35 

5.  In  the  impv.  the  2.  s.  act,  has  the  ending  hi,  as  srnvi-M,  three 
times  as  often  in  the  RV.  as  the  form  without  ending,  as  iSrnu  ;  in  the 
AV.  it  occui-s  only  about  one-sixth  as  often  as  the  latter  ;  in  B.  it  has 
almost  disappeared.  In  the  RV.  the  ending  dhl  also  occurs  in  ^rnu- 
dhl.  The  ending  tat  occurs  in  krnu-tat,  hinu-tat,  kuru-tat.  In  the 
2.  du.  are  found  the  strong  forms  krno-tam,  hino-tam  ;  and  in  the  2.  pi. 
krno-ta  and  krn6-tana,  iSrn6-ta  and  srn6-tana,  sun6-ta  and  suno-tana, 
hin6-ta  and  hino-tana  ;  tan6-ti  and  kar6-ta. 

D.  Infixing  Nasal  Class.  1.  anj  anoint,  bhanj  hreal', 
hims  injure  drop  their  nasal  before  inserting  na :  as 
a-nd-k-ti,  bha-na-k-ti,  hi-na-s-ti. 

2.  trh  crush  infixes  n6  in  the  strong  forms ;  e.  g. 
tr-n6-dhi  (69  c). 

E.  Ninth  or  Na  Class.  1.  The  three  roots  ji  overpower, 
ju  hasten,  pii  jnirifi/  shorten  their  vowel  before  the  affix : 
ji-na-mi,  ju-na-si,  pu-na-ti. 

2.  grabh  seize  and  its  later  form  grab  take  Samprasarana  : 
grbh-na-mi,  grh-na-mi  (AV.). 

3.  jna  know  and  the  four  roots  which  in  forms  outside 
the  present  system  appear  with  a  nasal,  bandh  hind,  manth 
shake,  skambh  make  firm,  stambh  prop,  drop  their  nasal : 
ja-na-ti,  badh-na-ti,  math-na-ti,  skabh-na-ti,  stabh-na-ti. 

4.  Four  roots  ending  in  consonants,  as  eat,  grab  seize, 
bandh  hind,  st&mhh  prop,  liave  the  peculiar  ending  ana  in 
the  2.  s.  impv.  act. :  as-ana,  grh-ana,  badh-ana,  stabh-ana. 

o.  pr  fill  and  mr  crush  make,  beside  the  regular  stems  prna  and 
mrna,  the  transfer  stems,  according  to  the  a  conjugation,  prnfi 
and  mrnd,  from  which  several  forms  occur. 

The  Perfect  Tense. 

135.  Tliis  tense  is  formed  by  reduplication.  Like  the 
present,  it  has,  besides  an  indicative,  the  subjunctive, 
injunctive,  optative,  and  imperative  moods,  as  well  as 
participles,  and  an  augmented  form,  the  pluperfect.  It  is 
very  common,  ])eing  formed  by  nearly  300  verbs  in  the 
Samhitas. 


in5-i36] 


TPTE  PEKFECT 


147 


Special  Rules  of  Reduplication. 

1.  r  and  r  {=  ar)  and  1  (=  al)  always  reduplicate  with  a 
(cp.  139,  9);  e.g.  kr  do:  ca-kr  ;  tr  cross:  ta-tr ;  kip  he 
adapted:  ca-klp  ;  v  go:  ar  (=  a-ar). 

2.  Initial  a  or  a  l)ecomes  a ;  e.  g.  an  breathe :  an ; 
ap  obtain  :  ap.  The  long  vowels  i  and  u  remain  unchanged 
{ =  i-i  and  u-ii) ;  e.  g.  is  move :  1 .  s.  is-6  ;  uh  consider : 
3.  s.  iih-6. 

3.  Roots  beginning  with  i  and  u  contract  i  +  i  to  i  and 
u  +  u  to  u  except  in  the  sing,  act.,  where  the  reduplicative 
syllable  is  separated  from  the  strong  radical  syllable  by  its 
own  semivowel :  e.  g.  i  po :  2.  s.  i-y-6-tha  ;  ue  be  pleased : 
2.  s.  mid.  uc-i-s6,  but  8.  s.  act,  u-v-6c-a. 

4.  Roots  containing  ya  or  va  and  liable  to  Samprasarana 
in  other  forms  (such  as  the  past  part,  pass.)  reduplicate 
with  i  and  u  respectively'.  There  are  four  such  with  ya  : 
tyaj  forsaJce,  yaj  sacrifice,  vyac  extend,  syand  move  on : 
ti-tyaj,  i-yaj,  vi-vyac,  si-syand ;  and  five  with  va :  vac  ^ 
speak,  vad  spealc,  vap  streio,  vah  carri/,  svap  sleep:  u-vac, 
u-vad,  u-vap,  u-vah,  su-svap.  On  the  other  hand  the 
three  roots  yam  stretch,  van  n-i)i,  vas  irear  have  the  full 
reduplication  ya  or  va  throughout :  ya-yam,  va-van, 
va-vas. 

136.  The  singular  perfect  active  is  strong  (like  the  sing. 
pr.  and  impf.  act.),  the  root  being  accented  ;  the  remaining 
forms  are  weak,  the  terminations  being  accented.  The 
endings  are  the  following : 

Active.  Middle. 


SING. 


DUAL 


PLUR. 


SIKG. 


DUAL 


PLUR. 


1. 

a 

[va' 

ma 

6 

vahe' 

mahe 

2. 

tha 

athur 

a 

s6 

athe 

dhv6 

3. 

a 

atur 

ur 

6 

ate 

r6 

*  vac  lias  two  forms  with  the  full  reduplication  :  B.  s.  act.  va-vac-a 
and  2.  s.  mid.  va-vak-s6. 

l2 


148  CONJUGATION  [13G 

a.  Terminations  beginning  with  initial  consonants  are  as 
a  rule  added  directly  to  the  stem ;  mahe  is  invariably  so 
added.  The  endings  tha,  ma,  se,  re  are  nearly  always 
added  direct  to  stems  ending  in  vowels  ;  thus  from  da  r/ive  : 
dada-tha ;  ji  conquer:  ji-g6-tha  ;  ni  lead:  nin6-tha ;  su 
jvess :  susu-ma  ;  hu  call :  juhii-r6 ;  kr  malr  :  cakar-tha, 
cakr-ma,  cakr-s6,  but  eakr-i-r^/  The  same  endings  tha, 
ma,  se,  re  are  added  directly  to  I'oots  ending  in  consonants, 
if  the  final  syllable  of  the  stem  is  prosodically  short,  but 
with  connecting  i^  if  it  is  long  ;  *  e.  g.  tatan-tha  ;  jagan-ma, 
jagrbh-ma,  yuyuj-ma ;  vivit-s6 ;  ca-klp-r6,  tatas-re, 
yuyuj-r6,  vivid-r6  ;  but  uv6c-i-tha,  uc-i-ma,  papt-i-ma  ; 
ij-i-r6. 

h.   Before  terminations  beginning  with  vowels  (cp.  137,  1  a) 

1 .  1  preceded  by  one  consonant  become  y ,  if  preceded  by 
more  than  one,  iy  ;  e,  g.  bhi  fear :  bibhy-atur  ;  sri  resort : 
sisriy-6. 

2.  u  ordinarily  become  uv  ;  e.  g.  yu  join  :  yuyuv-6  ;  sru 
hear  :  susruv-6  ;  su  sicell :  susuv-6/ 

3.  r  becomes  r,  r  becomes  ir ;  e.  g.  kr  mahr :  cakr-6, 
cakr-a ;  tr  cross :  titir-iir  ;  str  strew :  tistir-6. 

The  Strong  Stem. 

1.  Short  vowels  followed  by  a  single  consonant  take  Guna 
throughout  the  singular  active  ;  e.  g.  dis  2^oi7it :  di-d6s-a  ; 
no  he  iront :  uv-6c-a ;  krt  cut :  ca-kart-a  ;  but  jinv  qukliev  : 
ji-jinv-athur. 


1  Roots  in  r  always  add  re  with  connecting  i. 

-  The  final  radical  vowel  a  in  weak  forms  is  reduced  to  i,  e.g.  from 
dha  puf,  dadhi-dhve.  This  reduced  vowel  in  the  very  common  verbs 
da  and  dha  was  probably  the  starting-point  for  the  use  of  i  as  a  con- 
necting vowel  in  other  verbs. 

^  This  is  due  to  the  rhythmic  rule  that  the  stem  may  not  have  two 
prosodically  short  voAvels  in  .successive  syllables.     Cp.  p.  155,  note  2. 

*  "Bwi  h.\i  call :  juhv-6  ;  bhu  6e  :  babhuv-a;  six  bring  forth:  sa-suv-a. 


136-137]  THE  STEONG  STEM  149 

2.  Final  vowels  take  Vixldhi  in  the  3.  s. ; '  e.  g.  ui  lead : 
ni-nay-a ;  sru  hear :  su-srav-a ;  kr  make :  ca-kar-a. 

3.  Medial  a  followed  by  a  single  consonant  takes  Vrddhi 
in  the  3.  s. ; '  e.  g.  han  strike :  ja-ghan-a,  but  taks  fashion 

4.  Eoots  ending  in  a  take  the  anomalous  ending  au  in 
the  1.  and  3.  s.  act.  ;  e.  g.  dha  put :  da-dhau.  The  only 
exception  is  the  root  pra  fill,  which  once  forms  the  3.  s. 
pa-pra  beside  the  regular  pa-prau. 

The  Weak  Stem. 

137.  1.  In  roots  containing  the  vowels  i,  u,  r  the  radical 
syllable  remains  unchanged  except  by  Sandhi ;  e.  g.  yuj 
join  :  yu-yuj-ma  ;  vid  find :  vi-vid-6  ;  kr  ?nake :  ca-kr-ma. 

a.  Before  terminations  beginning  with  vowels,  i  and  r,  if 
preceded  by  one  consonant  become  y  and  r,  if  by  more  than 
one,  iy  and  ar ;  while  u  and  r  regularly  become  uv  and  ir  ; 
e.  g.  ji  conquer :  ji-gy-iir  ;  bhi  fear :  bi-bhy-ur ;  kr  make  : 
cakr-ur  ;  sri  resort :  si-sriy-6  ;  yu  join  :  yu-yuv-e  ;  sru 
hear:  su-sruv-6;  su  sivell:  su-suv-6 ;  tr  cross:  ti-tir-ur ; 
str  strew :  ti-stir-6. 

2.  In  roots  containing  a  medial  a  or  final  a  the  radical 
syllable  is  weakened. 

a.  About  a  dozen  roots  in  which  a  is  preceded  and 
followed  by  a  single  consonant  (e.  g.  pat)  and  which 
reduplicate  the  initial  consonant  unchanged  (this  excludes 
roots  beginning  with  aspirates,  gutturals,  and  for  the  most 
part  v)  contract  the  two  syllables  to  one  containing  the 
diphthong  e  (cp.  Lat.  fac-io,  fec-i).^     They  are  the  following: 


'  The  1.  slug,  never  takes  Vrddhi  in  the  RV.  and  AV.  In  an 
Upanisad  and  a  Sutra  eakara  occurs  as  1.  sing,  and  in  a  Sutra  jigaya 
(Vji)  also. 

-  This  vowel  spread  from  contracted  forms  like  sa-zd  (Av.  ha.:d)  weak 
perfect  stem  of  sad  sit  (az  becoming  e  ;  cp.  134,  2  b  and  133  A  1). 


150  CONJUGATION  [137 

tap  heut,  dabh  harm,  nam  bend,  pac  couk,  pat  flj,  yat ' 
stretch,  yam'  extend,  rabh  r/msp,  labh  ^a/rc,  sak  fee  tt^^t', 
sap  curse,  sap  seri'g.  Examples  are :  pat :  pet-atur ;  sak  : 
sek-iir. 

The  two  roots  tan  stretch  and  i>,2LG  follow  join  this  class  in 
the  AV. 

h.  Four  roots  with  medial  a  but  initial  guttural,  syncopate 
their  vowel:  khan  dig:  ca-khn ;  gam  yo:  ja-gm  ;  ghas 
eat :  ja-ks ;  ban  smite  :  ja-ghn. 

Six  other  roots,  though  conforming  to  the  conditions 
described  above  (2  a),  syncopate  the  a  instead  of  contracting  : 
jan  beget:  ja-jn;  tan  stretch:  ta-tn ;  pan  admire:  pa-pn ; 
man  think:  ma-mn;  van  ivin:  va-vn ;  sac  folloic:  sa-sc. 

a.  pat  fly  both  contracts  and  syncopates  in  the  RV.  :  pet  and  pa-pt. 

c.  Eight  roots  containing  the  syllables  ya,  va,  ra  take 
Samprasarana  :  yaj "  sacrifice,  vac  and  vad  s^jeak,  vap  stretv, 
vas  chvell,  vah  carry,  svap  sleej^),  grabh  and  grab  seise; 
e.  g.  sii-sup,  ja-grbh  and  ja-grh.  In  the  first  six,  as  they 
reduplicate  with  i  or  u,  the  result  is  a  contraction  to  i  and  u. 
Thus  yaj  :  ij  (=  i-ij) ;  vac  :  uc  (=  u-uc). 

d.  A  few  roots  with  medial  a  and  penultimate  nasal,  drop 
the  latter:  krand  cry  out:  ca-krad ;  tarns  shake:  ta-tas  ; 
sk.ambh.  prop :  ca-skabh  (AV.) ;  stambh  ^rqp:  ta-stabh. 

c.  Boots  ending  in  a  reduce  it  to  i  before  consonants 
and  drop  it  before  vowels ;  e.  g.  dha  place :  dadhi-ma ; 
dadh-ur. 


'  In  the  wk.  perfect  of  yat  and  yam  the  contraction  is  based  on  the 
combination  of  the  full  reduplicative  syllable  and  the  radical  syllable 
with  Samprasarana  :  yet  =  ya-it,  yem  =  ya-im. 

^  From  yaj  occurs  one  form  according  to  the  contracting  class  (2  o) : 
yej-e. 


i;JSj 


PARADIGMtt  OF  THE  PERFECT 


151 


Paradigms  of  the  Reduplicated  Perfect. 

138.   1.  tud  strike :  strong  stem  tu-tod  ;  weak  tu-tud. 

Active, 
singulak.  dual.  plural. 

[tu-tud-va]  tii-tud-ma 

tu-tud-athur         tu-tud-a 
tu-tud-atur  tii-tud-ur 


1. 

•> 

tu-t6d-a 

tu-t6d-i-tha 

tu-tod-a 

1. 
2. 
3. 

tu-tud-e ' 
tu-tut-se 
tu-tud- 6 

Middle. 

[tu-tud- vahej 
tu-tud-athe 
tu-tud-ate 


tu-tud-mahe 
[tu-tud-dhv6]  - 
tu-tud-r6 


2.  kr  do:  strong  stem  ca-kar,  ca-kar  ;  weak  cakr,  cakr. 

Active. 


1. 

2. 

-> 
o. 

ca-kar-a 

ca-kar-tha 

ca-kar-a 

[ca-ky-va 
ca-kr-athur 
ca-kr-atur 

Middle. 

ca-kr-ma 

ca-kr-a 

ca-kr-iir 

1. 

-J* 

3. 

ca-kr-e 

ca-kr-se 

ca-kr-6 

[ca-kr-yahe 
ca-kr-athe 
ca-kr-ate 

ca-kr-mahe 
ca-kr-dhv6 
ca-kr-i-re 

3.  6ha,  place  :  strong  stem  da-dha  ;  weak  da-dh,  da-dhi. 


[da-dhau] 
da-dha-tha 
da-dhau 


1.  da-dh-6 

2.  da-dhi-s6 

3.  da-dh-6" 


Active. 

[da-dhi-va] 
da-dh-athur 
da-dh-atvir 


Middle. 

[da-dhi- vahe] 
da-dh-athe 
da-dh-ate 


da-dhi-ma 

da-dh-a 

da-dh-iir 


da-dhi-mahe 
da-dhi-dhv6 
da-dhi-re 


^  Lat.  iu-tud-i. 


The  only  example  of  this  form  is  dadhi-dhve. 


152 


CONJUGATION 


[138 


4,  ni  lead :  strong  stem  ni-n6,  ni-nai  ;  weak  ni-ni. 

Active, 
singular.  dual.  plural. 


1. 

ni-nay-a 

[ni-ni-va 

ni-ni-ma 

2. 

ni-ne-tha 

ni-ny-athur 

ni-ny-a 

8. 

ni-nay-a 

ni-ny-atur 
Middle. 

ni-ny-ur 

1. 

ni-ny-6 

ni-ni-vahe! 

ni-ni-mahe 

2. 

ni-ni-s6 

ni-ny-athe 

ni-ni-dhv6 

3. 

ni-ny-6 

ni-ny-ate 

ni-ni-r6 

5.  stii  p)-aise  :  strong  stem  tu-sto,  tu-stau  ;  weak  tu-stu. 

Active. 


1. 

2. 
3. 

tu-stav-a 

tu-sto-tha 

tu-stav-a 

[tu-stu-va 
tu-stuv-athur 
tu-stuv-atur 

Middle. 

tu-stu-vahe] 
tu-stuv-athe 
tu-stuv-ate 

tu-stu-ma 

tu-stuv-a 

tu-stuv-iir 

1. 
2. 
3. 

tu-stuv-6 
tu-stu-s6 

•  •           • 

tu-stuv-6 

tu-stu-mahe 
tu-stu-dhve 
tu-stuv-i-re 

6.  tap  heat :  strong  stem  ta-tap,  ta-tap  ;  weak  tap. 

Active. 


1. 
2. 
3. 


ta-tap-a 

ta-tap-tha 

ta-tap-a 


1.  tep-6 

2.  tep-i-s6 

3.  tep-6  ' 


[tep-i-va] 
tep-athur 
tep-atur 

Middle. 

[tep-i-vahe] 
tep-athe 
tep-ate 


tep-i-ma 

tep-a 

tep-ur 


[tep-i-mahe] 
[tep-i-dhvej 
tep-i-r6 


138-13!)]        PARADIGMS  OF  THE  PEKFECT  158 

7.  gam  go :  strong  stem  ja-gam,  ja-gam  ;  weak  ja-gm. 

Active, 
singulak.  dual.  plural. 


1. 

2. 
3. 


ja-gam-a 

ja-gan-tha 

ja-gama 


1.  ja-gm-6 

2.  ja-gm-i-se 
o.    ja-gm-6 


[ja-gan-va] 

ja-gm-athur 

ja-gm-atur 

Middle. 

[ja-gan-vahe] 
ja-gm-athe 
ja-gm-ate 


ja-gan-ma 

ja-gm-a 

ja-gm-ur 


ja-gan-mahe 

ia-gm.-i-dhv6 

ja-gm-i-r6 


8.  vac  speali :  strong  stem  u-vac,  u-vac  ;  weak  uc. 

Active. 


1. 

3. 

u-vac-a 

u-vak-tha 

u-vac-a 

[uc-i-va 
uc-athur 
uc-atur 

Middle. 

uc-i-vahe 

vic-athe 

lic-ate 

uc-i-ma 

iic-a 

uc-ur 

1. 

O 

-J* 

3. 

uc-6 

uc-i-se 

ue-6 

uc-i-mahe 
uc-i-dhv6 
uc-i-re 

139. 


Irregularities. 
1.   bhaj  share,  though  beginning  with  an  aspirate, 


follows  the  analogy  of  the  contracting  perfects  with  e 
(137,  2  a);  e.  g.  ba-bhaj-a :  bhej-e.  bandh  hind,  after 
dropping  its  nasal,  does  the  same ;  e.  g.  ba-bandh-a : 
bedh-iir  (AV.). 

2.  yam  guide,  van  ivin,  vas  ivear  have  the  full  reduplica- 
tion throughout  (135,  4) ;  yam  takes  Samprasarana  of  the 
radical  syllable:  ya-yama :  yem-6  (=  ya-im-e) ;  van  syn- 
cof)ates  its  a :  va-van-a,  va-vn-e  ;  vas  retains  its  radical 
syllable  unweakened  throughout:  va-vas-e  (cjt.  139,  9). 


154  CONJUGATION  [139 

o.  vid  know  ionns  au  unreduplicated  perfect  with  present 
meaning  :  1.  v6d.-a  /  know  {oiSa,  German  weiss),  2.  vet-tha 
{oJ<T-9a  ;  weiss-t),  3.  v6d-a  [oiSe  ;  weiss) ;  pi.  1.  vid-ma  [iS-fxev; 
wissen),  2.  vid- a,  3.  vid-iir. 

a,  A  few  isolated  unreduplicated  foi'ms  from  about  six  other  roots 
oucur  :  taks-Sthur;  skambh-dthur  and  skambh-ur  ;  cet-atur;  yam- 
atur  and  yam-ur  ;  nind-i-ma  ;  arli-i-re. 

4.  The  initial  of  ci  gather,  ci  observe,  cit  perceive,  ji  conquer, 
han  kill  reverts  to  the  original  guttural  in  the  radical  syllable  : 
3.  s.  act.  ci-kay-a,  ci-k6t-a,  ji-gay-a,  ja-ghan-a.  bhr  bear 
almost  invariably  reduplicates  with  j  in  the  RV. :  ja-bhar-tha, 
ja-bhara,  ja-bhr-ur;  ja-bhr-6,  ja-bhr-i-s6,  ja-bhr-i-r6 ; 
but  only  once  with  b  :  ba-bhr-6. 

5.  all  say  is  defective,  forming  only  the  3.  s.  and  pi. :  ah-a 
and  ali-ur.  The  two  additional  forms  2.  s.  at-tha,  3.  du. 
ah-atiir  occur  in  the  Brahmanas. 

6.  Five  roots  beginning  with  a  prosodically  long  a  re- 
duplicate with  an:  Q.vas  attain,  anj  anoint,  ardh  thrive,  arc 
praise,  arh  deserve.  Only  the  first  two  make  several  forms. 
Here  the  radical  nasal  is  repeated  with  the  initial  vowel  : 
s.  3.  an-ams-a  (Gk.  ^V-ey/c-a) ;  pi.  1.  an-as-ma,  2.  an-as-a, 
3.  an-as-ur ;  mid.  s.  3.  an-as-e  ; '  s.  3.  an-afija,  mid.  s.  1. 
an-aj-6,  pi.  3.  an-aj-r6.  The  analogy  spread  from  these  to 
the  roots  which  have  no  nasal :  pi.  3.  an-rc-ur,  an-rdh-ur, 
an-rh-vir  ;  mid.  s.  3.  an-rc-6,  an-rdh-6. 

7.  bhu  be  has  the  double  irregularity  of  reduplicating 
with  a  and  retaining  its  u  throughout  (cp.  Gk.  7re-(f>v-a,<Ti) : 
sing.  1.  ba-bhu-v-a  (Gk.  7ri-(f>v-Ka).  2.  ba-bhu-tha  and 
ba-bhu-v-i-tha.  3.  ba-bhu-v-a.  Du.  2.  ba-bhu-v-athur. 
3.  ba-bhii-v-atur.  PI.  1.  ba-bhu-v-i-ma.  2.  ba-bhu-v-a. 
3.  ba-bhu-v-ur. 


1  In  a  Sutra  occurs  the  2.  pi.  mid.  an-as-a-dhve. 


I 


I3y-i40j     lEREGULAEITIES  OF  THE  PERFECT       155 

su  briny  forth  lias  the  same  peculiarities '  in  sa-su-v-a, 
the  only  perfect  form  of  this  root  occurring. 

8.  cyu  stir  reduplicates  ci-cyu  (beside  cu-cyu)  and  dyut 
shim  similarly  di-dyut.  This  was  due  to  the  vocalic 
pronunciation  of  the  y :  ciu,  diut. 

9.  The  reduplicative  vowel  is  lengthened  in  more  than 
thirty  perfect  stems  ;  e.  g.  kan  be  pleased  :  ca-kan  ;  gr  tvake  : 
ja-gr;  kip  he  adapted:  ca-klp  ;  dhi  thinJc:  di-dhi ;  tu  be 
strong:  tu-tu;  su  sicell:  su-su.-' 

a.  Ill  the  Mantra  portion  of  the  Samhitas  there  once  occurs  a  peri- 
phrastic perfect  form  with  the  reduplicated  perfect  of  kr  make  govern- 
ing the  ace.  of  a  fern,  substantive  in  a  derived  from  a  secondary 
(causative)  verbal  stem.  This  form  is  gamayani  cakara  (AV.)  he 
caused  to  go  (lit.  wutrfe  a  causing  to  go).  In  the  Brahmana  parts  of  the 
later  iSamhitas  (TS.,  MS.,  K.)  such  i:)eriphrastic  forms  are  occasionally 
met  with,  and  they  become  more  frequent  in  the  regular  Brahnianas. 


Moods  of  the  Perfect. 

140.  Modal  forms  of  the  perfect  are  of  rare  occurrence  in 
the  Sainhitas  except  the  RV. 

1.  The  subjunctive  is  normally  foimed  by  adding  a  to 
the  strong  perfect  stem  accented  on  the  radical  syllable. 
In  the  active  the  secondary  endings  are  the  more  usual ; 
when  the  primary  endings  are  used  the  reduplicative  syllable 
is  in  several  forms  accented.^  In  about  a  dozen  forms  the 
weak  stem  is  used.     Middle  forms,  of  which  only  seven  or 


1  The  root  si  lie  also  redujjlicates  w^ith  a  in  the  part,  sa-say-anfi. 
These  three,  bhvi,  sii,  si,  are  the  only  roots  with  an  i  or  u  vowel  that 
reduplicate  with  a. 

^  Here  the  radical  vowel  itself  is  shortened.  The  quantitative  form 
of  the  stem  is  subject  to  the  rule  that  it  may  not  contain  two  prosodi- 
cally  short  vowels  (except  in  the  1.  s.  act.).  Hence  sah  reduplicates 
either  as  sa-sah  or  sa-sah  (in  a  weak  form). 

^  Cp.  the  accentuation  of  the  reduplicating  class  in  the  2'i'eseiit 
system. 


156  CONJUGATION  [m 

eight  occur,  are  almost  restricted  to  the  3.  sing.  Examples 
are : 

Act.  s.  1.  an-aj-a  '  (afij  anoint) ;  2.  ta-tan-a-s  (tan  stretch), 
bu-bodh-a-s  (biidh  ivake),  pi-pray-a-s  {-pvi  jilease) ;  ju-jos- 
a-si  (jus  enjou) ;  ci-kit-a-s  (cit  observe),  mu-muc-a-s  (muc 
release).  3.  ci-ket-a-t,  ja-ghan-a-t  (han  smite),  ta-tan-a-t, 
tu-stav-a-t  (v/stu  x^raise),  pi-pray-a-t ;  di-des-a-ti  (dis 
point),  bu-bodh-a-ti,  mu-moc-a-ti ;  mu-muc-a-t,  vi-vid-a-t 
(vid  find). 

Du.  2.  ei-ket-a-thas,  ju-jos-a-thas.  PI.  1.  ta-tan-a-ma. 
2.  ju-jos-a-tha.     3.  ta-tan-a-n. 

Mid.  s.  8.  ta-tap-a-te,  ju-jos-a-te.  PI.  1.  an-as-a- 
mahai.' 

2.  The  injunctive  -  occui's  in  hardly  a  dozen  forms,  a  few 
in  the  sing,  act.,  the  rest  in  the  3.  pl.  mid. ;  e.g.  s.  2.  sa-sas 
(=sa-sas-s:  sas  on/er).  3.  dii-dho-t  (dhu  s7<aA;e),  su-sro-t 
{sv\ifl,ow);  mid.  pl.  3.  ta-tan-a-nta  (cp.  140,  6). 

3.  The  optative  is  formed  by  adding  the  accented  modal 
suffix  combined  with  the  endings  to  the  weak  perfect  stem. 
The  active  forms  are  much  commoner  than  the  middle. 
Examples  are : 

Act.  s.  1.  an-as-yam/  ja-gam-yam,  ri-ric-yam,  va- 
vrt-yam.  2.  ba-bhu-yas,  va-vrt-yas.  3.  an-aj-yat,'  ja~ 
gam-yat,  va-vrt-yat,  ba-bhu-yat. 

Du.  2.  ja-gam-yatam.  Pl,  1.  va-vrt-ya-ma.  3.  ja-gam- 
yiii',  va-vrt-yur. 

Mid.  s.  1.  va-vrt-iya.  2.  va-vrdh-i-thas.  3.  va-vrt-i-ta. 
Pl.  1.  va-vrt-i-mahi. 

a.  Tliere  also  occurs  one  mid.  precative  form  sa-sah-i-s-thas  (sah 

overcome). 

^  In  these  three  forms  the  a  of  the  reduplicative  syllable  an  is 
shortened  as  if  the  indicative  contained  an  augment. 

2  Identical  in  form  with  the  unaugmented  plujierfect  (140,  6). 

3  From  ams  attain,  with  the  long  reduplicative  vowel  retained. 
Cp.  139,  6.     ' 


140]  PEEFECT  OPTATIVE  157 

4.  The  impei'ative  perfect  is  formed  like  that  of  the 
present  reduplicating  class,  the  radical  syllable  being  weak 
except  in  the  3.  s.  act.,  where  it  is  strong.  Nearly  all  the 
forms  occurring,  which  number  about  twenty,  are  active. 
Examples  are  : 

Act.  s.  2.  ci-kid-dhi  (v^cit),  di-did-dhi  (/dis),  mu- 
mug-dhi  (Vmuc),  sa-sa-dhi  (\/sas).^  3.  ba-bhu-tu,= 
mu-mok-tu. 

Du.  2.  mu-muk-tam,  va-vrk-tam  (vrj  twist).  PI.  2. 
di-dis-tana  (\/dis),  va-vrt-tana. 

Mid.  s.  2.  va-vrt-sva.     PI.  2.  va-vrd-dhvam. 


Participle. 

5.  Both  active  and  middle  forms  of  the  perfect  participle 
are  common.  It  is  formed  from  the  weak  perfect  stem, 
with  the  accent  on  the  suffix,  as  cakr-vams,  cakr-ana. 
If,  in  the  active  form,  the  stem  is  reduced  to  a  monosyllable, 
the  suffix  is  nearly  always  added  with  the  connecting  vowel  i, 
but  not  when  the  stem  is  unreduplicated  ;  e.  g.  papt-i-vams 
(Gk.  TreTTT-co?),  but  vid-vams  (Crk.  elS-cos).     Examples  are  : 

Act.  ja-gan-vams  (\/gam),  ja-grbh-vams  (Vgrabh), 
ji-gi-vams  ( v/ji),  ju-ju-vams'^  (a^Ju),  ta-sthi-vams  (V'stlia), 
ba-bhu-vams  (Gk.  Tre-cpv-co^).  ri-rik-vams  (Vric),  va-vrt- 
vams,  va-vrdh-vams,^  sa-sah-vams,^su-sup-vams  ( /  svap) ; 
iy-i-vams  (Vi),  us-i-vams  (vas  dwell);  das-vams  (das 
ivorship),  sah-vams  (v^sah). 

Mid.  an-aj-ana  ( v^afij),  an-as-ana  ( V'aras),  ij-ana  ( Vyaj), 
uc-ana(v'vac),  ja-gm-ana(\/gam),  ti-stir-ana(v'str),  tep- 
ana    (^tap),    pa-spas-ana    (Vspas),    bhej-ana    (\/bhaj), 


1  Cp.  Gk.  Ki-K\v-0i,  2.  pi.  Kt-KXv-re  {k\v  =  sru  hem-). 

-  With  u  unchanged  as  in  strong  forms  elsewhere  (139,  7). 

"  With  long  reduplicative  vowol. 


158  CONJUGATION  [i40-ui 

yem-ana  (^^yam),  va-vrdh-ana,  sa-say-ana  (a/si),  si-sriy- 
ana  (-/sri),  si-smly-ana  (-/smi),  su-sup-ana  (\^svap), 
seh-ana  (\/sah). 

Pluperfect. 

6.  Corresponduig  to  the  imperfect  there  is  an  augmented 
form  of  the  perfect  called  the  pluijerfect.  The  strong  stem 
is  used  in  the  singular  active,  the  weak  elsewhere.  The 
secondary  endings  only  are  used  ;  in  the  3.  pi.  ur  always 
appears  in  the  active  and  iran  ^  in  tlie  middle.  The  s  and  t 
of  the  2.  and  3.  s.  are  in  some  forms  preserved  by  an 
interposed  i.  There  are  also  several  forms  made  with 
thematic  a  in  this  tense.  The  augment  is  often  dropped,  as 
in  other  past  tenses.  The  total  nimiber  of  pluperfect  forms 
occurring  is  about  sixty.     Examples  are  : 

Act.  s.  1.  a-cacaks-am,  a-jagrabh-am,  a-tustav-am; 
cakar-am,  eiket-am  (\/cit).  2.  a-jagan  (=  a-jagam-s) ; 
na-nam-a-s;  a-vives-i-s(\/vis).  3.  a-jagan  (  =  a-jagam-t), 
a-ciket  (\/cit) ;  ra-ran  {=  raran-t :  ran  rejoice) ;  a-ja- 
grabh-i-t ;  a-cikit-a-t  and  a-ciket-a-t ;  tastambh-a-t. 

Du.  2.  a-mu-muk-tam ;  mu-muk-tam.  3.  a-vavas-i- 
tam  (vas  desire). 

PI.  2.  a-jagan-ta  ;  a-cucyav-i-tana.     3.  a-cucyav-ur. 

Mid.  s.  1.  a-susrav-i.  3.  didis-ta  (Vdis).  PI.  3.  a-eakr- 
iran,  a-jagm-iran,  a-pec-iran;  a-vavrt-ran,  a-sasrg-ram 
(A/srj).'-  There  are  also  several  transfer  forms  as  from 
a  stems  ;  e.  g.  a-titvis-a-nta,  cakrp-a-nta,  da-dhrs-a-nta. 

Aorist. 

141.  This  tense  is  of  very  common  occurrence  in  the 
Vedas,   being  formed  from  more  that  450  roots.     It  is  an 

1  Two  forms  take  ran  only  instead  of  iran.     There  are  a]>;o  several 
transfer  forms  in  anta. 

2  Witli  reversion  of  the  palatal   to  original  guttural,  and  ending 
ram  for  ran. 


141]  AOETST  159 

augmented  tense,  taking  the  secondaiy  endings  and  forming- 
moods  and  participles.  It  is  distinguished  from  the  imperfect 
by  having  no  corresponding  present  and  by  difference  of 
meaning.  There  are  two  types  of  aorist.  The  first  or 
sigmatic  aorist  is  formed  by  inserting  s,  with  or  without  an 
added  a,  between  the  root  and  the  endings.  It  is  taken  by 
more  than  200  roots.  The  second  aorist  adds  the  endings 
to  the  simple  or  the  reduplicated  root  either  directly  or  with 
the  connecting  vowel  a.  It  is  taken  by  over  250  roots. 
There  are  four  forms  of  the  first  Aorist,  and  three  of  the 
second.  Upwards  of  50  roots  take  more  than  one  form. 
One  verb,  budh  ^valie,  has  forms  from  five  varieties  of  this 
tense. 

First  Aorist. 

a.  The  stem  of  the  first  form  is  made  by  adding  to  the 
augmented  root  the  suffix  sa.  It  is  inflected  like  an  imperfect 
of  the  sixth  or  a  class  of  the  first  conjugation,  the  sa  being 
accented  in  unaugmented  forms.  It  is  taken  in  the  Samhitas 
by  only  ten  roots '  containing  one  of  the  vowels  1,  u,  r,  and 
ending  in  one  of  the  consonants  j,  s,  s,  or  h,  all  of  which 
phonetically  become  k  before  s."  These  roots  are :  mrj  nnjie, 
yaj  sacrifice,  vrj  tivist ',  krus  cry  oid,  mrs  and  sprs  touch  ; 
dvis  hate  ;  guh  hide,  duh  milk,  ruh  ascend.  In  the  indicative 
no  dual  forms  are  found  ;  and  in  the  mid.  only  the  3.  s.  and 
pi.  are  met  with.  The  only  moods  occurring  are  the 
injunctive  and  the  imperative,  with  altogether  fewer  than 
a  dozen  forms.  This  form  of  the  aorist  corresponds  to  the 
Greek  First  Aorist  (e.g.  '4-Sei^e,  Lat.  dixi-t).  The  augment, 
as  in  other  past  tenses,  is  sometimes  dropped. 


'  In  B.  nine  additional  roots  take  the  sa  aorist :  krs  drag,  dia  point, 
dih  mnear,  drs  see,  druh  he  hostile,  pis  crush,  mih  viingere,  vis  enter,  vrh 
tear  ;  and  in  S.  lih  lick. 

2  The  stem  of  this  aorist  therefore  always  ends  in  ksa. 


160  CONJUGATION  [141-143 

Indicative.  Act.  s.  1.  avrksain.  2.  adruksas  (B.), 
adhuksas.  3.  akruksat,  aghuksat,  aduksat  ^  and  adhuk- 
sat,  amrksat  (v^mrs),  aruksat,  asprksat.  PI.  1.  amrksa- 
ma  (v^mrj),  aruksama.  3.  adhuksan ;  dtiksan^  and 
dhuksan. 

Mid.  s.  3.  adhuksata  ;  duksata '  and  dhuksata.  PI.  3. 
amrksanta  (\/mrj). 

In  the  injunctive  only  the  following  forms  occur  : 

Act.  s.  2.  duksas,^  mrksas  (v^mrs).  3.  dviksat.  PI.  2. 
mrksata  (-/mrs). 

Mid.  s.  8.  duksata'  and  dhuksata,  dviksata.  PI.  3. 
dhuksanta. 

In  the  imperative  only  three  forms  occur : 

Act.  du.  2.  mrksatam  (\/m.rj).     3.  yaksatam. 

Mid.  s.  2.  dhuksasva. 

142.  The  other  three  forms  of  the  First  Aorist  are  made 
by  adding  to  the  augmented  root  the  suffixes  s,  is,  s-is 
respectively.  They  are  inflected  like  imperfects  of  the 
second  or  graded  conjugation.  The  sis  form  is  used  in  the 
act.  only  (excepting  three  optative  forms)  and  is  taken  by 
not  more  than  six  roots.  The  other  two  are  very  common, 
being  formed  from  nearly  300  roots  in  V.  and  B.  taken 
together. 

Second  or  s  form. 

148.  This  form  of  the  aorist  is  taken  l^y  at  least  135 
roots  in  V.  and  B.  In  addition  to  the  indicative  it  forms 
all  the  moods  and  a  participle. 

Indicative. 

1.  The  radical  vowel  as  a  rule  takes  Vrddhi  (a  being 
lengthened)  in  the  active.  In  the  middle,  excepting  final  i 
and   u  (which  take   Guna)   the  radical  vowel  remains  un- 


'  On  these  forms  without  initial  aspiration  ep.  02  a. 


143] 


FIRST  AORIST 


161 


changed.  The  only  point  in  which  the  inflexion  differs 
from  that  of  the  imperfect  of  the  graded  conjugation  is  that 
the  3.  pi.  act.  invariably  ends  in  iir.  In  the  active,  the 
endings  s  and  t  of  the  2.  3.  s.  disappear  and  the  tense  sign 
also,  unless  the  root  ends  in  a  vowel ;  e.  g.  a-har  =  a-har-s-t, 
but  a-ha-s  —  a-ha-s-t.  The  AV.  and  TS.,  however,  less 
often  than  not,  insert  a  connecting  i  before  these  endings,^ 
thus  preserving  both  the  latter  and  the  s  of  the  tense  stem  ; 
e.g.  a-naik-s-i-t  (nij  wasli).  The  forms  of  the  indicative 
actually  occurring  would,  if  made  from  bhr  hear  in  the 
active,  and  from  budh  walx  in  the  middle,  be  as  follows : 


SINGULAR. 

1.  a-bhar-s-am 

2.  a-bhar 

3.  a-bhar 


Active. 

DUAL. 

[a-bhars-va] 
a-bhars-tam 
a-bhars-tam 


PLURAL. 

a-bhars-ma 

a-bhars-ta 

a-bhar-s-ur 


SINGULAR. 


1.  a-bhut-s-i  (62  a) 

2.  d-bud-dhas  (62  h) 

3.  a-bud-dha  (62  h) 


Middle. 

DUAL. 

[a-bhut-s-vahij 
a-bhut-s-atham 
a-bhut-s-atam 


plural. 

a-bhut-s-mahi 
a-bhud-dhvam  (62  a) 
a-bhut-s-ata 


The  middle  voice,  as  exemplified  by  a  root  ending  in  ti, 
stu  'praise,  is  inflected  as  follows : 

Sing.  1.  a-sto-s-i.    2.  a-sto-s-thas.    3.  a-sto-s-ta.    Du.  1. 

o  •  •      •  •      • 

[a-sto-s-vahi].  2.  [a-sto-s-atham].  3.  a-sto-s-atam. 
PI.  1.  a-sto-s-mahi.  2.  a-sto-dhvam  (66  B  2  Zj).  3.  a-sto- 
s-ata. 


1  The  KV.  and  K.  have  no  forms  with  the  inserted  i ;  while  in  B. 
the  chief  forms  without  it  are  adrak  (drs  see)  and  ay  at  (yaj  sacrifice)  ; 
also  bhais  (Vbhi)  =  bhais-s,  which  while  losing  the  s  ending  pre- 
serves the  appearance  of  a  2.  sing. 


1819 


M 


162  CONJUGATION  [i43 

2.  The  subjunctive  is  common  in  the  KV/  in  active 
forms,  but  not  in  the  middle.  The  root  regularly  takes 
Guna  throughout  (active  and  middle).  The  primary  endings 
are  frequent.  The  forms  occurring,  if  made  from  stu  praise, 
would  be  : 

Act.  sing.  1.  sto-s-ani.  2.  sto-s-a-si,  sto-s-a-s.  3.  st6- 
s-a-ti,  sto-s-a-t.  Du.  2.  sto-s-a-thas.  3.  st6-s-a-tas. 
PL  1.  st6-s-a-ma.     2.  sto-s-a-tha.     3.  sto-s-a-n. 

Mid.  sing.  1.  sto-s-ai.  2.  sto-s-a-se.  3.  sto-s-a-te. 
Du.  2.  sto-s-athe  (for  sto-s-aithe).     PI.  3.  sto-s-a-nte, 

3.  Injunctive  forms  are  fairly  common.  When  normal 
they  are  of  course  identical  with  the  unaugmented  indicative. 
But  the  sing.  1.  act.  is  irregular  in  never  taking  Vrddhi : 
all  the  forms  of  it  that  occur  either  have  Guna,  as  sto-s-am, 
je-s-am  (Vji) ;  or  lengthen  the  radical  vowel,  as  yu-s-am 
(yu  separate) ;  or  substitute  e  for  a  in  roots  ending  in  a,  as 
ye-s-am  (ya  go),  ge-s-am  (ga  go),  sthe-s-am  (stha  stand). 
The  latter  irregularity  also  appears  in  pi.  1 :  je-s-ma, 
ge-s-ma,  de-s-ma  (da  give),  beside  the  normal  yau-s-ma 
(yu  separate). 

4.  The  optative  occurs  in  the  middle  only,  the  2.  3.  s. 
always  having  the  precative  s  (with  one  exception).  The 
forms  actually  occurring  are.: 

Sing.  1.  di-s-iya"  (da  ciii),  bhak-s-iya  (bhaj  divide), 
ma-s-iya'  (man  tlnnli),  muk-s-iya  (muc  release),  ra-s-iya 
{vdigive),  sak-s-iya*  (AV.),  str-s-iya  (str  streiv).  2.  mam- 
s-i-s-thas=  (man  tlmik).  3.  dar-s-i-s-ta  (dr  tear),  bhak-s- 
ita  ^  (SV.),  mam-s-i-s-ta,  mrk-s-i-s-ta  (mrc  injure).     Du.  2. 

1  Subjunctives  of  this  aor.  are  very  rare  in  B.  except  yaks-a-t  (-/yaj) 
and  vaks-a-t  (-/vah). 

2  With  radical  a  reduced  to  i  :  cp.  5  c.    Similarly  dhi-s-iya  (Vdha) 

inB. 
s  With  an  reduced  to  a  (=  sonant  nasal). 
*  From  sah  overcome,  with  radical  vowel  lengthened, 
s  Anusvara  for  n  (66  A  2).    ^ 
c  Without  the  precative  s. 


U3-144]  MOODS  OF  THE  S  AORTST  163 

tra-s-i-tham^  (tra  protect).  PI.  1.  bhak-s-i-mahi,  mam-s-i- 
mahi,-  vam-s-i-mahi  and  va-s-i-mahi  '  (van  win),  sak-s-i- 
mahi  (sac  folloiv),  dhuk-s-i-mahi  (duh  milJi).  3.  mam- 
s-ii'ata. 

5.  Only  six  imperative  forms  occur,  and  four  of  these  are 
transfers  (with  thematic  a).  They  are :  Act.  s.  2.  ne-s-a 
(ni  lead)  and  par-s-a  (pr  take  across).  Mid.  s.  2.  sak-sva 
(Vsah).  3.  ra-s-a-tam.  Du.  2.  ra-s-atham.  PI.  3. 
ra-s-a-ntam. 

6.  Only  two  or  three  forms  of  the  active  participle 
occur :  dak-s-at^  and  dhak-s-at  (dah  hum),  sak-s-at  (-/sah). 

About  a  dozen  stems,  irregularly  formed  by  adding  s  to 
the  root  with  an  intermediate  a  and  taking  the  regular 
ending  ana,  may  be  accounted  middle  s  aorist  participles  ; 
e.  g.  mand-a-s-ana  rejoicing,  yam-a-s-ana  being  driven. 

Irregularities  of  the  s  form. 

144.  1.  Before  the  suffix  s,  (a)  final  radical  n  (as  well 
as  m)  becomes  Anusvara  (66  A  2),  as  a-mam-s-ata  ('/man), 
vam-s-i-mahi  (Vvan) ;  (&)  s  becomes  t  in  the  verb  vas 
divell  and  possibly  also  in  vas  shine :  a-vat-s-i-s  ^  (AV.)  thou 
hast  dtvelt  and  a- vat  (=  a-vas-s-t)  has  shone  (AV.). 

2.  The  KV.  has  one  example  of  an  incipient  tendency  to 
preserve  the  s  and  t  of  the  2.  3.  s.  in  2.  s.  a-ya-s  (=a-yaj-s-s) 
beside  the  phonetically  regular  form  of  the  3.  s.  a-yat 
(=  a-yaj-s-t).  The  AV.  has  three  or  four  examples  of  this  : 
s.  2.  sra-s  (=sraj-s-s:    Vsvj);   3.   a-srai-t  (=  a-srai-s-t : 


1  For  tra-s-iyatham. 
'■^  With  Anusvara  for  n  (66  A  2). 
^  With  an  reduced  to  a  (=  sonant  nasal). 
*  Without  initial  aspiration  :  cp.  62  a  and  156  a. 
^  See  66  B  1.     In  an  Upanisad  the  2.  du.  appears  as  d,-vas-tam,  the 
aor.  suffix  s  having  been  lost  without  affecting  the  radical  s. 


M  2 


164  CONJUGATION  [144 

-/sri);  a-hai-t  (=  a-hai-s-t :  v^hi);  a-va-t '  (=  a-vas-s-t : 
vas  sJdne).  The  later  Samliitas  here  frequently  preserve 
these  endings  by  inserting  i  before  them :  s.  2.  a-rat-s-i-s 
(v^radh),  a-vat-s-x-s  (vas  dtvell);  3.  a-tam-s-i-t  (v'tan), 
a-naik-s-i-t  (\/nij),  tap-s-i-t  (Vtap),  bhai-s-i-t  (\/bhi), 
vak-s-i-t  (-/vah),  ha-s-i-t,  hvar-s-i-t  (v^hvar). 

a.  The  ending  dhvam  (before  which  the  s  of  the  aor.  is  lost)  becomes 
dhvam  when  the  s  would  have  been  cerebralized  (66  B  2)  :  d-sto- 
dhvam  (  =  a-sto-z-dhvam)  is  the  only  example. 

3.  The  roots  da  give  and  da  cut  reduce  the  radical  vowel 
to  i  in  a-di-s-i,  di-s-iya ;  gam,  man,  van  lose  their  nasal  in 
a-ga-smalii,  ma-s-iya,  va-s-i-mahi  (beside  vam-s-i-mahi) ; 
while  sah  lengthens  its  vowel  in  a-sak-s-i,  sak-s-i ;  sak-s- 
ama  ;  sak-s-iya ;  sak-sva. 

4.  The  roots  srj  emit  and  pre  mix  take  metathesis  in  the 
act.:  s.  2.  sra-s  (=  srak).  3.  a-srak ;  a-prak.  Du.  2. 
a-sras-tam. 

5.  The  following  are  the  forms  occurring  in  the  3.  s.  ind. 
act.  in  which  (a)  the  ending  t  is  lost :  a-jai-s  ( V}i),  a-pra-s, 
a-ha-s  ;  (h)  both  the  tense-sign  s  and  the  ending  t  are  lost  :^ 
a-kran  (krand  crij  out),  a-ksar  (ksar  flow),  a-cait  (cit 
Xjerceive),  a-chan  (chand  seem),  a-tan  (tan  stretch),  a-tsar 
(tsar  approach  stealthily),  a-dyaut  (dyut  shine),  a-dhak  (dah 
hum),  a-prak  (pre  mix),  a-prat  (prach  asTi),  a-bhar  (bhr), 
a-yat  (yaj  sacrifice),  a-yan  (yam  guide),  a-raut  (rudh 
obstruct),  a-vat  (vah  couve//),  a-vat^  (vas  shine),  a-svait  (svit 
he  hright),  a-syan  (syand  move  on),  a-srak  (srj  emit),  a-svar 
(svar  sound),  a-har  (hr  tahe),  a-raik  (rie  leave). 

6.  After  a  consonant  other  than  n,  m,  r  the  tense  sign  s 
is  dropped  before  t,  th,  and  dh ;  e.  g.  a-bhak-ta  (beside 
a-bhak-s-i) ;  a-muk-thas  (beside  a-muk-s-i). 

1  But  the  t  may  in  this  instance  represent  the  changed  final  radical 
s  :  144,  1  (b).  There  are  a  few  additional  examples  in  B.  :  ajait 
(beside  ajais  and  ajaisit :  Vji) ;  acait  (^ci);  nait  (\/ni). 

2  And  even  the  final  consonant  of  the  root  when  there  are  two  (28). 


145]  IS  AOKIST  165 

Third  or  is  form. 

145.  About  145  roots  take  this  aorist  in  V.  and  B.  It 
differs  from  the  s  aorist  merely  in  adding  the  s  with  the 
connecting  vowel  i,  which  changes  it  to  s  (67). 

Indicative. 

1.  The  radical  vowel  as  a  rule  takes  Guna  throughout ; 
but  in  the  active  a  final  vowel  takes  Vrddhi  and  a  medial 
vowel  is  sometimes  lengthened.  The  endings  are  the  same 
as  those  of  the  s  aorist  except  that  the  2.  3.  s.  end  in  is 
(=  is-s)  and  it  (=  is-t).  This  aorist  has  all  the  moods,  but 
no  participle.  Middle  forms  are  not  common  and  very  few 
occur  except  in  the  2.  3.  sing. 

The  normal  forms  occurring,  if  made  from  kram  stride, 
would  be : 

Act.  sing.  1.  a-kram-is-am.  2.  a-kram-is.  3.  a-kram-it. 
Du.  3.  a-kram-is-tam.     PI.  1.  a-kram-is-ma,     3.  a-kram- 

•      •  • 

is-ur. 

Mid.  sing.  1.  a-kram-is-i.  2.  a-kram-is-thas.  3.  a-kram- 
is-ta.     Du.  3.  a-kram-is-atam.     PI.  3.  a-kram-is-ata. 

•      •  •  • 

2.  Subjunctive  forms  are  rare  except  in  the  2.  3.  s.  act. 
Examples  are : 

Act.  sing.  1.  dav-is-ani.  2.  av-is-a-s,  kan-is-a-s.  3.  kar- 
is-a-t,  bodh-is-a-t.     PI.  3.  san-is-a-n. 

Mid.  pi.  1.  yac-is-a-malie.     3.  san-is-a-nta. 

3.  Injunctive  are  commoner  than  subjunctive  forms. 
They  occur  most  frequently  in  the  2.  3.  s.  and  plur. 
Examples  are : 

Act.  sing.  1.  sams-is-am  (sams  praise).  2.  av-is  (av 
favour),  tar-is  (tr  cross),  yodh-is  (yudh  fight),  sav-is  (su 
generate).  3.  as-it  (as  eat),  tai'-it.  Du.  2.  taris-tam,  mardh- 
is-tam  (mrdh  neglect).  Pi.  1.  sram-is-ma.  2.  vadh-is-ta 
and  vadh-is-tana.     3.  jai'-is-ur  (jr  waste  away). 

Mid.  sing.  1.  radh-is-i  (radh  succeed).     2.  mars-is-thas 


166  CONJUGATION  [Ii5-146 

(mra  not  heed).     3.  pav-is-ta  (pu  j;Mr(/2/),     PL   1.  vyath-is- 
mahi  (vyath  waver). 

4.  Optative  forms  are  rare,  occurring  in  the  middle  only. 
The  2.  3.  s.  take  the  precative  s.     Examples  are  : 

Sing.  1.  edh-is-ija,  {edh  tJmve).  2.  mod-is-i-s-thas  (mud 
rejoice).  3.  jan-is-i-s-ta.  Du.  1.  sah-is-i-vahi.  PI.  tar-is- 
i-mahi. 

5.  Imperative  forms  are  rare,  occurring  in  the  active  only. 
Sing.  2.  av-id-dhi.  3.  av-is-tu.  Du.  2.  av-is-tam.  3.  av- 
is-tam.     PL  2.  av-is-tana. 

a.  The  I'adical  medial  a  is  lengthened  in  kan  enjoy,  car  move,  das 
waste,  mad  exhilarafc,  stan  fhnnder,  svan  sound,  and  optionally  in  vad 
speak,  ran  rejoice,  san  gain,  sah  prevail ;  while  the  radical  syllable 
appears  in  a  reduced  or  unstrengthened  form  in  the  opt.  s.  1.  mid.  of 
gam  and  rue  shine  :  gm-is-iya  and  ruc-is-iyd. 

6.  The  root  grabh  seize  takes  the  connecting  vowel  i  (as  it  does  in 
other  verbal  forms)  instead  of  i,  as  d,-grabh-is-ma. 

c.  In  s.  1.  ind.  act.  the  ending  im  appears  instead  of  is-am  in  the 
three  forms  a-kram-im,  d,-grabh-im,  and  vadh-im,  doubtless  owing  to 
the  analogy  of  the  2.  3.  s.  in  is,  it.  In  B.  is  also  found  a-grah-ais-am 
(-/grab). 

Fourth  or  sis  form. 

146.  This  form  differs  from  the  preceding  one  simply  in 
prefixing  an  additional  s  to  the  suffix.  Only  seven  verbs 
ending  in  a,  n,  or  m,  ga  slug,  jna  Inow,^  pya  Jill  up,  ya  go, 
ha  leave,  van  ^oin,  ram  rejoice,  take  this  aorist.  The  total 
number  of  forms  occurring  is  under  twenty  ;  and  middle 
forms  are  found  in  the  optative  only.  The  forms  occurring 
are : 

1.  Indicative.  Sing.  1.  a-ya-sis-am.  Du.  3.  a-ya-sis- 
tam.     PL  2.  a-ya-sis-ta.     3.  a-ga-sis-ur,  a-ya-sis-ur. 

2.  Subjunctive.     Sing.  3.  ga-sis-a-t,  ya-sis-a-t. 


^  In  B.  also  occurs  dhya  ildnk,  besides  forms  in  s-it  from  dra  sleep, 
va  Uoio,  hva  call. 


116-147]      SIS  FOEM  OF  THE  FIKST  AORIST  167 

3.  Optative.     Sing.  1.  vam-sis-iya.     2.  ya-sis-i-s-thas,^ 
PI.  1.  pya-sis-i-mahi. 

4.  Injunctive.    Sing.  1.  ram-sis-am.    Du.  2.  ha-sis-tam. 
3.  ha-sis-tam.     PI.  2,  ha-sis-ta.     3.  ha-sis-ur. 

•      •  •      •  • 

5.  Imperative.     Du.  2.  ya-sis-tam.     PI.  2.  ya-sis-ta." 


Seeond  Aorist.      (^  '<z^'^-^y 


147.  This  aorist  resembles  an  imperfect  formed  directly 
from  the  root,  the  terminations  being  added  with  or  without 
the  connecting  vowel  a. 

The  first  form  is  like  an  imperfect  of  the  accented  a  class 
(125,  2),  the  stem  being  formed  by  adding  a  to  the  un- 
modified root."  It  corresponds  to  the  second  aorist  of  the 
first  conjugation  in  Greek.  It  is  taken,  in  V.  and  B. 
together,  by  nearly  eighty  roots,  chiefly  with  a  medial  vowel. 
Middle  forms  are  rai'e. 

1.  Indicative.  The  forms  actually  occurring  would,  if 
made  from  vid  find,  be  as  follows  : 

Act.  sing.  1.  avidam.  2.  avidas.  3.  avidat.  Du.  1. 
avidava.     PI.  1.  avidama.     2.  avidata.     3.  avidan. 

Mid.  sing.  1.  avide.  2.  avidathas.  3.  avidata.  Du.  1. 
avidavahi.    3.  avidetam.    PI.  1 .  avidamahi.    3.  avidanta. 

2.  The  subjunctive  forms  from  the  same  root  would  be : 
Act.  sing.  2.  vidasi,  vidas.     3.  vidati,   vidat.     Du.   1. 

vidava.    2.  vidathas.    3.  vidatas.    PI.  1.  vidama.    2.  vid- 
atha,  vidathana. 

Mid.  sing.  3.  vidate.     PI.  1.  vidamahe. 

3.  The  injunctive  forms  from  vid  would  be : 

Act.  sing.  1.  vidam.    2.  vidas.     3.  vidat.    PI.  3.  vidan. 
Mid.  sing.  3.  vidata.     PI.  1.  vidamahi.     3.  vidanta. 

4.  The  optative  is  rare  in  V.,  but  not  infrequent  in  B. 

^  With  precative  s. 

2  With  i  for  i. 

'  Three  roots  witJi  r,  however,  show  forms  with  Guna  (147  o  2  and  c). 


168  CONJUGATION  [W-US 

It  is  almost  restricted  to  the  active.  The  forms  from  vid 
would  be : 

Act.  sing.  1.  videyam.  2.  vid6s.  3.  vid6t.  PI.  1. 
vid6ma. 

Mid.  sing.  1.  vid6ya.  PI.  1.  vid6mahi.  There  also  occurs 
one  precative  form,  s.  3.  vid^sta  (AV.). 

5.  Imperative  forms  are  rare  and  almost  restricted  to  the 
active.     Those  made  by  sad  sit  are : 

Sing.  2.  sada.    3,  sadatu.    Du.  2.  sadatam.    3.  sadatam. 
PI.  2.  sadata,  sadatana.     3.  sadantu. 
Mid.  pl.  2.  sadadhvam.     3.  sadantam. 

6.  Eather  more  than  a  dozen  examples  of  the  participle, 
taking  active  and  middle  together,  occur :  e.  g.  trp-ant, 
sucant;  guhamana,  sucamana. 

Irregularities. 

a.  Several  roots  form  transfer  stems  according  to  this  instead  of  the 
root  form,  chiefly  by  reducing  the  radical  syllable. 

1.  khya  see,  vya  envelope,  hva  ccdl  shorten  their  a  to  a :  a-khya-t, 
d-vya-t,  d-hva-t ;  da  (jive,  dha  put,  stha  stand  occasionally  do  the  same, 
in  tlie  forms  a-da-t ;  a-dha-t  (SV.)  and  dha-t ;  a-stha-t  (AV.) ;  sas 
order  shortens  a  to  i  ;  e.  g.  3.  s.  inj.  sisat,  part,  sisant. 

2.  kr  make  and  gam  go  form  a  few  transfers  from  the  root  class  in 
the  AV.,  retaining  the  strong  radical  vowel :  ^-kar-a-t,  a-gam-a-t, 
5-gam-a-n. 

b.  Tlie  root  is  reduced  by  the  loss  of  its  nasal  in  krand  cry  out,  tarns 
shake,  d h vams  scai^er,  bhrams /aZi,  randh  wia&e  swft/eci,  .srains /aZZ ;  e.g. 
3.  sing,  dtasat ;  pl.  dhvasdn ;  subj.  ]A.  1.  radhama  ;  inj.  sing.  1. 
radham  ;  2.  kradas  ;  3.  bhrasat. 

c.  The  root  takes  Guna  in  r  go,  drs  see,  st  flow  ;  e.g.  dr-anta  (unaug- 
mented  3.  pl.  ind.  mid.);  ddrs-am  (s.  1.  inj.,  but  pl.  3.  inj.  drs^n,  opt. 
1.  s.  drs6yam,  pl.  drs^ma) ;  sdrat  (unaugmented  3.  s.). 

Second  Form :  Root  Aorist. 

148.  This  form  of  the  simple  aorist  is  taken  by  about 
100  roots  in  V.,  and  about  25  others  in  B.,  the  commonest 
being  those  with  medial  a  (about  30).     It  corresponds  to 


148]  KOOT  AORIST  169 

the  second  aorist  of  the  second  conjugation  in  Greek.     It  is 
inflected  in  both  active  and  middle. 

Indicative. 

1.  Tlie  root  is  strong  in  the  sing,  act.,  but  weak  elsewhere. 
Roots  ending  in  vowels,  however,  tend  to  retain  the  strong 
vowel  throughout  the  active  except  the  3.  pi.  Those  en  ding- 
in  a  regularly  retain  that  vowel  throughout  the  ind.  act. 
except  in  3.  pi.  where  it  is  dropped  before  ur,  which  is 
always  the  ending  in  these  verbs.  In  the  3.  pi.  mid.  the 
ending  ran  is  more  than  twice  as  common  as  ata ;  ram  as 
well  as  ran  is  taken  by  three  roots. 

a.  The  forms  occurring  from  roots  ending  in  a,  if  made 
from  stha,  would  be : 

Act.  sing.  1.  a-stha-m  i^i-a-T-q-v).  2.  a-stha-s.  3.  a-stha-t 
(e-o-TT;).  Du.  2.  a-stha-tam.  3.  a-stha-tam.  PI.  1.  a-stha-ma 
(i-arrj- fxiiv).     2.  a-stha-ta.     3.  a-sth-ur. 

Mid.  sing.  2.  a-sthi-thas  {k-ard-Or^s).  3.  a-sthi-ta.  PI.  1. 
a-sthi-mahi.     3.  a-sthi-ran. 

h.  Roots  in  r  take  Guna  throughout  the  ind.  act.  except 
the  3.  pi.     The  forms  from  kr  would  be  : 

Act.  sing.  1.  a-kar-am.  2.  a-kar.  3.  a-kar.  Du.  2. 
a-kai'-tam.  3.  a-kar-tam.  PI.  1.  a-kar-ma.  2.  a-kar-ta. 
3.  a-kr-an. 

Mid.  sing.  1.  a-kr-i.  2.  a-kr-thas.  3.  a-kr-ta.  Du.  1. 
a-kr-vahi.  3.  a-kr-tam.  PI.  1.  a-kr-mahi.  2.  a-kr- 
dhvam.     3.  a-kr-ata. 

c.  bhu  he  retains  its  ii  throughout  (as  in  the  perfect), 
interposing  v  between  it  and  a  following  a : 

Act.  1.  a-bhuv-am.^  2.  a-bhu-s.  3.  a-bhii-t  (e-^u). 
Du.  2,  a-bhu-tam.  3.  a-bhu-tam.  PI.  1.  a-bhu-ma 
(e-^y-ziei/).     2.  a-bhii-ta  and  a-bhu-tana.     3.  a-bhii-v-an. 

d.  The  following  are  forms  of  the  2.  3.  s.  act.  in  which 


^  With  split  u  ;  in  the  later  language  a-bhuv-aui. 


170  CONJUGATION  [us 

the  endings  s  and  t  are  lost:  2.  a-kar,  a-gan  (=  a-gam-s), 
a-ghas,  a-var  (vr  cover),  a-spar  (spr  tvin) ;  with  lengthened 
augment:  a-nat'  (nas  attain),  a-var  (vr  cover),  a-vas^  (vas 
shine).  3.  a-kar,  a-kran'  (kram  stride),  a-gan,'  a-ghas, 
a-cet  (cit  observe),  a-tan,  a-dar  (dr  pierce),  a-bhet  (bhid 
pierce),  a-bhrat  (bhraj  shine),  a-mok  (muc  release),  a-myak 
(myaks  be  situated),  a-vart  (vrt  ^wm),  a-star;  with  lengthened 
augment:  a-nat,*  a-var  (vr  cove)-),  a- vas-  (vas  shine) ;  without 
augment :  vark  °  (vrj  twist),  skan  ^  (skand  Icaj)). 

e.  In  the  3.  pi.  act.  and  mid.  roots  with  medial  a  are 
syncopated:  a-ks-an  (=a-ghas-an),  a-gm-au  (=a-gam-an); 
a-gm-ata  (=  a-gam-ata),  a-tn-ata  ( :=  a-tan-ata) ;  but  in 
the  2.  3.  s.  mid.  they  lose  their  nasal :  a-ga-thas,  a-ga-ta, 
a-ma-ta  (but  1.  du.  gan-vahi,  pi.  a-gan-mahi). 

/  Final  a  is  in  the  mid.  ind.  reduced  to  i,  and  before  m 
also  to  i ;  e.  g.  2.  a-di-thas,  a-sthi-thas.  3.  a-dhi-ta 
(e-^e-To).  PL  1.  a-dhi-mahi  (TS.)  and  a-di-mahi  (VS.), 
a-dhi-mahi. 

g.  In  the  3,  s.  ind.  ghas  is  reduced  to  g :  gdha  (=:ghas-ta) '; 
while  r  go  takes  Guna:  ar-ta  (unaugmented)  and  ar-ta 
(wp-To),  3.  pi.  ar-ata. 

/*.  The  forms  taking  ran  in  3.  pi.  mid.  are  :  a-krp-ran, 
a-grbh-ran,  a-jus-ran,  a-drs-ran,  a-pad-ran,  a-budh-ran, 
a-yuj-ran,  a-vas-ran  (vas  shine),  a- vis-ran,  a-vrt-ran, 
a-srg-ran,*  a-sthi-ran,  a-sprdh-ran  ;  with  ram  :  a-drs-ram, 
a-budh-ram,  a-srg-ram.* 


^  For  a-nas-s,  the  phonetic  result  of  which  should  have  been 
a-nak  (63  6). 

"  For  a-vas-s,  a-vas-t.  These  forms  have  by  an  oversight  been 
omitted  in  §  499  of  my  Vedic  Grammar. 

'  For  d-kram-t,  £-gam-t. 

*  For  a-nas-t.  '  For  varj-t.  ^  For  skand-t. 

''  By  syncopation  gh-s-ta ;  loss  of  s  between  consonants  (66  B  2  a) 
gh-ta,  and  loss  of  aspiration,  which  is  thrown  forward  on  the  t  and 
renders  it  sonant  (62  b). 

*  With  reversion  to  the  original  guttural. 


14S]  MOODS   OF   THE   KOOT   AORIST  171 

2.  The  subjunctive  is  common,  nearly  100  forms  being 
met  with.    The  forms  occurring,  if  made  from  kr,  would  be : 

Act.  sing.  1.  kara  and  kar-ani.  2.  kar-a-si  and  kar-a-s. 
o.  kar-a-ti  and  kar-a-t.^  Du.  2.  kar-a-thas.  3.  kar-a-tas. 
PI.  1.  kar-a-ma.     3.  kar-anti,  kar-a-n. 

Mid.  sing.  2.  kar-a-se.  3.  kar-a-te,^  PI.  1.  kar-a-mahe 
and  kar-a-mahai.     3.  kar-anta. 

3.  The  injunctive  is  fairly  frequent,  nearly  sixty  forms  of 
it  being  met  with.     Examples  are : 

Act.    sing.    1.   kar-am,   dars-am,^   bhuv-am,    bhoj-am. 

2.  je-s,  bhu-s,  bhe-s  (bhi /car),  dhak^  (dagh  reach),  bhet 
(bhid  split),  rok  (ruj  break).  3.  bhu-t,  sre-t  (Vsri),  nak 
and  nat  (nas  attain).  PI.  1.  dagh-ma,  bhu-ma ;  ched-ma/ 
ho-ma  ^  (hu  call).  3.  bhuv-an,  vr-an  (vr  cover) ;  kram-ur, 
dur  (da  give),  dh-iir  (dha  put). 

Mid.  sing.  1.  nams-i  (nams  =  nas  attain).     2.  nut-tlias  \ 

(nud  push),  mr-thas  (mr  die),  mrs-thas  (mrs  neglect),  rik- 
thas  (ric  leave).  3.  ar-ta  (r  go),  as-ta  (as  attain),  vik-ta 
(vij  tremble),  vr-ta  (vr  choose).     PI.  1.  dhi-mahl  {dhQ,put). 

4.  Morethanforty  optative  forms  are  met  with.  Examples 
are : 

Act.  sing.  1.  as-yam  (as  obtain),  vrj-yam,  de-yam  (da 
give).     2.    as-yas,    rdh-yas,    gam-yas,   jne-yas,    bhii-yas. 

3.  bhu-yat^  (AV.).  PI.  1.  as-yama,  rdh-yama,  kri-yama, 
bhu-yama,  sthe-yama.     3.  as-yiir  (as  attain),  dhe-yur. 

Mid.  sing.  1.  as-iya.  3.  ar-I-ta  [v  go).  PI.  1.  as-i-mahi, 
idh-i-mahi  (idh  Mndle),  nas-i-mahi  (nas  reach). 


^  The  root  is  weak  in  the  isolated  forms  fdh-a-t,  bhiiv-a-t,  sriiv-a-t. 

^  The  weak  root  appears  once  in  the  form  idh-a-t^.  The  weak  root 
also  appears  once  in  the  2.  du.  form  rdh-athe. 

'  This  may,  however,  be  an  irregular  a  aorist  :  cp.  147  c. 

*  For  dagh-s. 

5  With  strong  radical  vowel. 

s  The  RV.  has  no  forms  of  the  3.  s.  in  yat,  but  only  precatives  in 
yas  (=  yas-t). 


172  CONJUGATION  [us 

a.  There  are  also  about  thirty  precative  forms  (made  from 
about  twenty  roots  in  the  Samhitas),  all  of  which  except  two 
are  active.     Examples  are  : 

Act.  sing.  1.  bhu-yasam.  8.  as-yas  {=.  as-yas-t),  gam- 
yas,  dagh-yas,  pe-yas  (pa  dnnli\  bhu-yas.  Du.  2. 
bhu-yastam.     PI.  1.  kri-yasma.     2.  bhu-yasta. 

Mid.  s.  3.  pad-i-s-ta,  muc-i-s-ta. 

5.  Over  ninety  forms  of  the  imperative  occur,  all  but 
about  twelve  being  active.  Several  forms  in  the  2.  persons 
act.  have  a  strong  root,  which  is  then  usually  accented. 
Examples  are: 

Act.  s.  2.  kr-dhi,  ga-dhi  (gam),  pur-dhi  {^'i  fill),  bo-dhi,' 
yo-dhi"  {jndh  fight),  sag-dhi  (sak  he  able) ;  ga-hi  (gam  go), 
ma-hi  (ma  measure),  sa-hi  (sa  hind).  3.  gan-tu  (gam  go), 
dha-tu,  bhu-tu,  sro-tu. 

Du.  2.  kr-tam  and  kar-tam  (AV.),  ga-tam  and  gan-tam, 
da-tam,  dhak-tam  (dagh  reach),  bhu-tam,  var-tam  (vr 
cover),  vo-lham  (vah  carr//),  sru-tam.  3.  gan-tam,  pa-tam, 
vo-lham.  PI.  2.  kr-ta  and  kar-ta,  ga-ta  and  gan-ta,  bhii-ta, 
yan-ta,  sru-ta  and  sro-ta ;  kar-tana,  gan-tana,  dha-tana, 
bhu-tana.     3.  gam-antu,  dhantu,  sruv-antu. 

Mid.  s.  2.  kr-sva,  dhi-sva  (dha  put),  yuk-sva  (yuj  join) ; 
accented  on  the  root :  mat-sva,  yak-sva  (yaj  sacrifice),  ra-sva, 
vam-sva  (van  ivin),  sak-sva  (sac  follow).  PI.  2.  kr-dhvam, 
vo-dhvam. 

6.  Of  the  participle  only  seven  or  eight  examples  occur 
in  the  active,  but  nearly  forty  in  the  middle.    Examples  are  : 

Act.  rdh-ant,  kr-ant,  gm-ant,  sthant. 

Mid.  ar-ana,  idh-ana,  kr-aiia,  drs-ana  and  drs-ana, 
budh-ana,  bhiy-ana,  vr-ana  (vr  cover),  subh-ana  and 
sum-bhana,  suv-ana  (always  to  be  pronounced  svana)  and 
sv-ana  (SV.). 


1  Formed  from  both  bhu  be   (for    bhu-dhi)  and    budh    awake  (for 
bod-dhi  instead  of  bud-dhi). 
"  For  yud-dhi  (through  yod-dhi). 


14ft]  EEDUPLICATED   FORM  173 

Third  or  Reduplicated  Form. 

149.  This  aorist  is  formed  from  nearly  ninety  verbs  in 
the  Samhitas  and  from  nearly  thirty  more  in  the  Brahmanas. 
Though  (with  a  few  slight  exceptions)  unconnected  in  form 
with  the  causative,  it  has  come  to  be  connected  with  the 
causative  in  sense,  having  a  causative  meaning  when  the 
corresponding  verb  in  aya  has  that  meaning.  The  character- 
istic feature  of  this  aorist  is  the  almost  invariable  quantitative 
sequence  of  a  long  reduplicative  and  a  short  radical  vowel 
(-  w).  In  order  to  bring  about  this  rhythm,  the  reduplicative 
vowel  (unless  it  becomes  long  by  position)  is  lengthened,  if 
the  radical  vowel  is  (or  is  made)  prosodically  short.  With 
this  view  the  radical  vowel  is  shortened  in  vas  hello/v,  sadh 
succeed,  hid  he  JiostUe  and,  by  dropping  the  nasal,  in  krand 
cry  out,  jambh  crush,  randh  subject,  syand  flow,  srams  fall. 
The  stem  of  the  great  majority  of  forms  is  made  with  a 
thematic  a.  But  about  a  dozen  roots  ending  in  vowels 
(a,  i,  u,  r)  and  svap  sleep  make  occasional  forms  from  stems 
without  thematic  a,  the  inflexion  then  being  like  that  of  an 
imperfect  of  the  reduj^licating  class  (127,  2).  A  medial 
radical  vowel  remains  unchanged  or  is  weakened,  but  a  final 
vowel  takes  Guna.     All  the  moods  occur,  but  no  participle. 

Special  Rules  of  Reduplication. 

a.  The  vowels  a,  f,  1  are  represented  in  the  reduplicative 
syllable  by  i. 

Tj.  The  vowel  of  the  reduplicative  syllable,  unless  already 
long  by  position,  is  lengthened. 

1.  The  forms  of  the  indicative  actually  occurring  would, 
if  made  from  jan  heget,  be  as  follows : 

Act.  s.  1.  ajijanam.  2.  ajijanas.  o.  ajijanat.  Du.  2. 
ajijanatam.    PI.  1,  ajijanama.     2.  ajijanata.     3.  ajijanan. 

Mid.  s.  3.  ajijanata.    Pi.  2.  ajijanadhvam.   3.  ajijananta. 


174  CONJUGATION  [149 

The  following  are  examples  : 

Act.  s.  1.  aninasam  (nas  he  lost),  acikrsam  (krs  drag), 
apiplavam  (B.),  apiparam  (pr  pass).  2.  aei-krad-as, 
abubhuvas ;  sisvapas ;  without  thematic  a :  a-jigar  (gr 
stvallow  and  gr  waken) ;  sisvap.  3.  aciklpat,  acucyavat  (K.), 
ajihidat  (Vhid),  adidyutat,  abubudhat,  avivasat  (Vvas), 
avi-vrdhat,  asisyadat(  %/syand);  bibhayat,  sisnathat  (snath 
pierce);  without  thematic  a:  a-sisre-t  (\/sri),  a-sisnat. 
PI.  3.  avivasan  (\/vas),  asisrasan  (Vsrams),  asisadan 
( -/sad) ;  abibhajur  (B.). 

Mid.  s.  3.  avivarata  (vr  cover).  PI.  2.  avivrdhadhvam. 
3.  abibhayanta,  avivasanta  (\^vas),  asisyadanta. 

2.  The  subjunctive  is  rare,  only  about  a  dozen  forms 
occurring,  all  active  except  one.     Examples  are : 

Act.  s.  1.  raradha.  2.  titapasi.  3.  eiklpati,  pisprsati,^ 
sisadhati  (Vsadh).     PI.  1,  riramama,  sisadhama. 

3.  Injunctive  forms  are  fairly  common,  more  than  fifty 
occurring  in  the  active,  but  only  five  in  the  middle. 
Examples  are : 

Act.  s.  1.  eukrudham,  didharam(dhr/?o/(;).  2.  ciksipas, 
pisprsas,  riradhas,  sisadhas.  3.  cucyavat,  didharat, 
mimayat  (ma  heUoiv),  sisvadat  (svad  sweeten). 

Du.  2.  jihvaratam.  PI.  2.  riradhata.  3.  riraman, 
susucan  (sue  shine).     3.  sisapanta  (sap  serve). 

4.  The  optative  forms  number  hardly  a  dozen,  being 
made  from  only  three  roots,  mostly  from  vac  speaJc,  the  rest 
from  cyu  stir  and  ris  hurt.     They  are  : 

Act.  s.  1.  voc6yam.     2.  ririses,  voc6s.     3.  voc6t. 

Du.  2.  voc^tam.     PI.  1.  voc6ma.     3.  voceyur. 

Mid.  s.  1.  voc6ya.  PI.  1.  cucyuv-i-mahi,  ^  voc^mahi. 
3.  cucyav-i-rata.^  There  is  also  the  3.  s.  mid.  precative 
form  riris-i-s-ta. 

•  •      • 

'  Without  thematic  a. 


149-150]  MOODS  OF  THE  REDUPLICATED  AORIST  175 

5.  Hai'dly  more  than  a  dozen  imperative  forms  occur,  all 
of  them  active.     These  are  : 

Sing.  2.  vocatat.     3.  vocatu. 

Du.  2.  jigrtam  ^  (gr  ivakcn),  didhrtam,^  vocatam.  PI.  2. 
jigr-ta,^  didhrta,  ^  paptata,  vocata,  susiidata  (AV.). 
3.  pupurantu  (pr  fill),  sisrathantu. 

Irregularities. 

a.  1.  The  reduplicative  syllable  of  dyut  shine  has  i  *  :  fi-didyutat ; 
that  of  am  injure  repeats  the  whole  root  ^ :  am-am-at  (  =  d-am-am-at)  ; 
while  it  is  left  short  in  jigrtam,  jigrt&  (beside  d-jigar),  didhrt^m, 
didhrtfi  (beside  d,-didharat),  and  in  the  isolated  inj.  didipas  for 
didipas  (dip  shine). 

2.  The  radical  syllable  suffers  contraction  or  syncopation  (as  in  the 
weak  forms  of  the  perfect)  in  the  three  verbs  nas  be  lost,  vac  speak,  and 
pat  fall;  thus  a-nes-at  (=  6-nanas-at),  a-voc-at  (=  ^-va-uc-at  :  cp. 
Gk.  i-un-o-v)  and  d-papt-at.  Having  all  had  the  reduplicative  vowel 
of  the  perfect  (while  the  regular  aorist  reduplicative  i  appears  in 
the  alternative  forms  d-ninas-at  and  d,-pipat-at),  they  were  probably 
pluperfects  in  origin.  But  they  have  come  to  be  aorists  as  is  shown 
by  their  meaning  and  by  the  occurrence  of  modal  forms  (as  vocatu, 
&c.,  and  paptata). 

3,  The  initial  of  the  suffix  is  retained  from  the  causative  stems 
jna-paya,  stha-paya,  ha-paya,  bhi-saya,  ar-paya,  ja-paya  (Vji)- 
The  radical  vowel  is  reduced  to  i  in  the  first  four,  while  the  redupli- 
cative vowel  comes  after  instead  of  before  the  radical  vowel  in  the 
fifth  :  thus  d,-ji-jmp-at ;  fi-ti-sthip-at ;  ji-hip-as  ;  bi-bhis-as,  bi-bhia- 
athas  ;  arp-ip-am*;  i-ji-jap-a-ta^  (VS.). 

Benedictive  or  Precative.  « 

150.  This  is  a  form  of  the  optative  which  adds  an  s 
after  the  modal  suffix  and  which  is  made  almost  exclusively 
from  aorist  stems.     In  the  RV.  it  occurs  in  the  1.  3.  s,  and 


1  Without  thematic  a. 
-  Cp.  its  perfect  reduplication  :  139,  8. 

3  Cp.  the  perfect  reduplication  of  roots  with  a  +  nasal  (139,  6). 
*  Here  the  p  of  the  suffix  is  not  only  retained,  but  reduplicated. 
^  The  causative  of  ji  conquer  from  which  this  aor.  is  formed,  would 
normally  have  been  jay-aya.    In  B.  also  occurs  the  form  d-ji-jip-ata. 


176  CONJUGATION  [150-151 

1.  pi.  active,  and  in  the  2.  3.  s.  mid.  The  endings  together 
with  the  modal  suffix  are : 

Act.  s.  1.  ya-s-am.     3,  ya-s  {=  yas-s) ;  pi.  1.  ya-s-ma. 

Mid.  s.  2.  i-s-thas.     3.  i-s-ta. 

a.  The  only  perfect  precative  occurring  is  the  2.  s.  mid. : 
sa-sah-i-s-thas. 

h.  Of  the  root  aorist  nearly  thirty  precatives  are  met  with 
in  the  Samhitas.  They  occur  in  the  act.  1.  3.  s.,  2.  du., 
1.  2.  pi. ;  mid.  3.  s.  (see  148,  4  a).  The  a  aorist  and  the 
reduplicated  aor.  have  one  precative  form  each  in  the  3.  s. 
mid.  (147,  4  and  149,  4).  In  the  s  aorist  four  precative 
forms  occur  in  the  2.  and  3.  s.  mid.  (see  143,  4). 


Simple  Future. 

151.  The  stem  is  formed  by  adding  the  suffix  sya  or 
(rather  less  frequently  with  connecting  i)  i-sya  to  the  root. 
As  the  future  sense  is  often  expressed  by  the  subjunctive 
and  sometimes  also  by  the  indicative,  the  future  tense  is  not 
common  in  the  EV. ,  being  formed  from  only  sixteen  roots, 
while  the  AV.  makes  it  from  about  thirty-two  others,  and 
the  TS.  forms  it  from  over  sixty  roots.  In  V.  and  B.  taken 
together  over  one  hundred  form  the  future  in  sya  and  over 
eighty  that  in  isya.  The  only  derivative  verbs  that  form 
the  future  (always  with  isya)  are  causatives,  of  which  four 
stems  appear,  two  in  the  EV.  and  two  in  the  AV.  Eoots 
ending  in  r  always  take  isya,  whereas  those  ending  in  other 
vowels  generally  take  sya. 

a.  Final  vowels  and  prosodically  short  medial  vowels  take 
Guna,  final  a  and  medial  a  remaining  unchanged  ;  e.  g. 
ji  conquer:  je-sya ;  m  lead:  ne-sya ;  da  give:  da-sya ; 
mih  sJied  ivater :  mek-sya  ;  yuj  join  :  yok-sya ;  krt  cut : 
kart-sya ;  dah  hum  :  dhak-sya ;  bandh  hind :  bhant-sya ; 
bhu  he :  bhav-isya ;  sr  ^flotv  :  sar-isya  ;  vrt  turn  :  vart- 
isya. 


151-152]  SIMPLE   FUTURE  177 

a.  Causatives,  which  always  take  isya,  retain  the  present  stem, 
dropping  only  the  final  a  ;  thus  dharay-isyS  (dhr  support);  vasay-iayfi 
(vas  wear)  ;  dus-ay-isyd,  (dus  spoil)  ;  varay-isyfi  (vr  cover). 

b.  The  inflexion  of  the  future  is  like  that  of  the  present  of 
the  first  conjugation  (bhavami).  Middle  forms  occur  in  the 
sing.  only.  The  forms  met  with,  if  made  from  kr  do, 
would  be : 

Act.  s.  1.  kar-isyami.     2.  kar-isyasi.     3.  kar-isyati. 
Du.  2.  kar-isyathas.     3.  kar-isyatas.     PI.   1.  kar-isya- 
mas,  -masi.     2.  kar-isyatha.     3.  kar-isyanti. 

Mid.  s.  1.  kar-isy6.     2.  kar-isyase.     3.  kar-isyate. 

1.  Only  one  subjunctive,  the  2.  s,  act.  kar-isyas,  has 
been  met  with  in  V.,  and  one  other,  1.  du.  mid.,  not-syava- 
hai  (nud  imsli)  in  B. 

2.  More  than  twenty  participles  occur,  of  which  only  four 
are  mid.     Examples  are  : 

Act.  kar-isy-ant,  dhak-sy-ant  (-/dah) ;  mid.  yak-sya- 
mana  (Vyaj),  stavisya-mana  (-/stu). 

Irregularities. 

c.  In  su  bring  forth  the  future  stem  is  formed  with  unchanged  final 
vowel,  which  is  moreover  accented  :  su-sya  ;  while  the  medial  a  of  sah 
is  lengthened  :  sak-syd. 

Periphrastic  Future. 

152.  There  is  no  certain  example  of  this  form  of  the 
future  in  the  Samhitas.  But  such  a  phrase  as  anv-aganta 
yajnapatir  vo  atra  (TS.,  VS.)  the  sacrifice)'  is  folloiving  after 
you  here  may  be  an  example  of  its  incipient  use.^ 

In  B.  this  future  is  taken  by  nearly  thirty  roots.  It  is  made  by 
using  the  N.  s.  of  an  agent  noun  in  tr  (ISO),  to  which  the  present  of 
the  verb  as  be  is  added  in  the  1.  2.  persons,  while  in  the  3.  persons  du. 
and  pi.  the  N.  du.  and   pi.  appear.     The  use  of  this  tense-form  is 

1  The  forerunners  in  V.  of  this  new  tense-formation  in  B.  are  the 
agent  nouns  in  tr  which,  generally  accented  on  the  root,  are  used 
partieipially  governing  an  ace.  and  may  be  employed  predicatively 
with  or  without  the  copula  ;  e.  g.  data  yo  v^nita  magh^m  (iii.  13')  who 
gives  and  wins  bounty. 

1819  N 


178  CONJUGATION  [152-154 

almost  limited  to  the  active,  only  a  few  isolated  examples  being 
found  in  the  middle.  Forms  occurring,  if  made  from  bhii  be,  would 
1)6:  Act.  sing.  1.  bhavitasmi ;  3.  bhavita.  PI.  1.  bhavitasmas  ;  3. 
bhavitaras.     Mid.  sing.  1.  2.  bhavitase.     PI.  1.  bhavitasmahe. 


Conditional. 

153.  This  is  a  past  tense  of  the  future  meaning  would 
have.  Only  one  example  occurs  in  the  Samhitas :  a-bhar- 
isya-t  (RV.  ii.  30")  was  going  io  hear  off.  This  form  is 
very  rare  in  B.  also,  except  in  the  SB.  where  it  is  found 
more  than  fifty  times. 

Passive. 

154.  The  passive,  which  takes  the  terminations  of  the 
middle,  differs  from  the  latter  only  in  the  forms  made  from 
the  present  stem  and  in  the  3.  s.  aor.  From  the  middle  of 
verbs  of  the  fourth  class  it  differs  in  accent  only :  nah-ya-te 
hinds :  nah-ya-te  is  hound. 

The  stem  is  formed  by  adding  accented  ya  to  the  root, 
which  appears  in  its  weak  form. 

1.  Final  a  mostly  becomes  i  ;  e.  g.  da  give  :  di-ya  ;  but  it 
also  remains  ;  e.  g.  jna  Icnow  :  jna-ya. 

2.  Final  i  and  u  are  lengthened  ;  e.g.  ji  conquer:  ji-ya-te  ; 
sru  hear:  sru-ya-te. 

3.  Final  r  becomes  ri  ;  e.  g.  kr  malce  :  kri-ya-te.^ 

4.  Final  r  becomes  ir  ;  e.  g.  sr  crush  :  sir-ya-te.^ 

5.  Roots  ending  in  a  consonant  preceded  by  a  nasal,  lose 
the  nasal;  e.g.  anj  anoint:  aj-ya-te;  bandh  hind:  badh- 
ya-te  ;  bhaiij  hreaJc :  bhaj-ya-te ;  vane  move  croohedly  :  vac- 
ya-te ;  sams  praise  :  sas-ya-te. 


1  The  only  two  roots  in  which  r  is  preceded  by  two  consonants  and 
which  form  a  passive  are  str  sfretv  and  smr  rememher.  Their  passives  do 
not  occur  in  the  Sainhitas,  but  in  B  are  found  stri-ya-te  and  smar-yd-te. 

2  The  passive  oi-pfflll  does  not  occur  in  the  Samhitas,  but  in  B.  it  is 
pur-ya-te  (the  f  being  preceded  by  a  labial). 


154-155]  PASSIVE  179 

6.  Boots  liable  to  Samprasarana  (17  note  1)  take  it ;  e.  g. 
vac  spcalc :  uc-ya-te  ;  vad  si^eaJc :  ud-ya-te  ;  vah  carry  : 
uh-ya-te ;  grab  seize :  grh-ya-te. 

a.  Derivative  verbs  in  aya  (causatives)  drop  the  suffix  while  retain- 
ing the  strong  radical  vowel.  Only  one  such  stem  has  been  noted  in 
the  Samhitfis  :  bhaj-ya-te  is  caused  to  share  (from  bhaj-dya  causative  of 
bhaj  share). 

a.  The  forms  of  the  present  indicative  passive  occurring, 
if  made  from  hu.  call,  would  be : 

Sing.  1.  hu-y6.  2.  hu-ya-se.  o.  hii-ya-te.  Du.  3. 
hu-y6-te.     PL  1.  hu-ya-mahe.     3.  hu-ya-nte. 

h.  As  regards  the  moods  only  two  certain  subjunctive 
forms  (s.  3.  uh-ya-te,  bhri-ya-te)  and  one  injunctive  (s.  3. 
su-ya-ta :  su  hring  forth)  occur.  No  optative  forms  occur 
in  the  RV.  or  AV.^  There  are,  however,  nearly  thirty 
imperative  forms  occurring  in  the  2.  3.  s.  pi.  These  forms, 
illustrated  by  hu  call,  are  :  s.  2.  hu-ya-sva.  3,  hu-ya-tam. 
PI,  2.  hu-ya-dhvam.     3.  hu-ya-ntam. 

c.  Of  the  participle  over  forty  examples  occur ;  e.  g.  hu- 
ya-mana  being  called.  Of  the  imperfect  only  about  eight 
forms  have  been  noted,  occurring  only  in  the  3.  s.  and  pi.  : 
a-hu-ya-ta  and  a-hu-yanta. 

Irregularities. 

(7.  tan  stretch  forms  its  passive  from  ta  :  ta-yd.-te'^.  Similarly  jan 
beget  becomes  ja-ya-te  is  born,  which,  however,  in  foi-m  belongs  to  the 
radically  accented  fourth  class,  mri-ya-te  dies  (Vmr)  and  dhri-y£-te 
(v^dhr)  is  steadfast,  while  passive  in  form,  are  intransitive  in  sense. 

Aorist  Passive. 

155.  Outside  the  present  system  the  passive  has  no 
special  finite  form  except  in  the  3.  sing.  aor.  This  is  a 
peculiar  middle  form  (made  from  about  forty-five  roots  in 


^  But  they  are  met  with  in  the  Brahmanas. 
2  In  B.  kha-yfi-te  is  formed  from  khan  dig. 

N  2 


180  CONJUGATION  [ir,5-i56 

the  Samhitas) '  which  is  used  with  a  predominantly  passive 
meaning.  When  it  is  formed  from  verbs  with  a  neuter  sense, 
like  gam  go,  that  sense  remains  unchanged  (as  in  the  past 
passive  participle).  It  is  a  3.  s.  ind.  in  which  the  augmented 
root  takes  the  ending  i.  The  characteristic  feature  of  this 
form  is  the  strengthening  of  the  root  as  compared  with  other 
middle  forms;  e.g.  a-kar-i  beside  a-kr-i  (1.  s.  mid.). 
Prosodically  short  medial  i,  u,  r  take  Guna,  and  medial  a  is 
normally  lengthened  :  final  i,  u,  r  take  Vrddhi,  while  final  a 
interposes  a  y  before  the  ending.  The  accent  of  unaug- 
mented  forms  is  always  on  the  root.  Examples  are: 
a-ved-i  {vid  find),  a-bodh-i  (budh  wake),  a-dars-i  (drs  scr), 
a-vac-i  (vac  speak) ;  a-sray-i  (sri  resort),  a-stav-i  (stu 
praise),  a-kar-i  (kr  do),  a-dha-y-i  (dha  put). 

More  than  twenty  unaugmented  forms  are  also  used 
injunctively  ;  e.  g.  srav-i  let  he  heard. 

Irregularities. 

a.  1.  The  medial  a  is  not  lengthened  in  fi-jan-i,  the  unaugmented 
jdn-i  (beside  jan-i),  and  S-vah.-i. 

2.  From  the  denominative  stem  jarayai^Za?/  tfte  lover  the  unique  form 
jaraya-y-i  let  him  he  embraced  is  formed. 


PARTICIPLES,  GERUNDS,  AND  INFINITIVE. 

I.    Active  Participles. 

156.  The  stem  of  the  present  (except  the  reduplicating 
class),  the  future,  and  the  aorist  active  participle  is  formed 
with  the  suffix  ant.^  The  strong  stem  may  be  obtained  by 
dro2^ping  the  i  of  the  3.  pi.  ind.  act. ;  e.  g.  bhav-ant,  ksip- 
ant,  as-yant;    duh-ant,  krnv-ant,  bliind-ant,  pri-nant. 


1  About  a  dozen  more  are  found  in  B. 

2  On  the  declension  of  participles  in  ant  see  85  ;  nn  the  formation 
of  their  fern,  stems,  95  a. 


156-157]  PARTICIPLES  181 

Stems  of  the  reduplicating  class  do  not  distinguish  strong 
forms  because  they  drop  the  n :  e.  g.  juhv-at  (3.  pi. 
juhv-ati). 

The  strong  stem  of  the  future  participle  may  similarly  be 
obtained  by  dropping  the  i  of  the  3.  pi.  act,  :  bhavisyant, 
karisyant. 

The  active  participle  is  formed  by  the  root  aorist,  the 
a  aorist,  and  the  s  aorist,  from  the  unaugmented  tense  stem 
in  the  latter  two  ;  e.  g.  vida-nt,  sak-s-ant  (sah  premil) ;  and 
from  the  weakened  or  unmodified  root  in  the  former ;  e.  g. 
rdh-ant,  kr-ant  (kr  make),  gm-ant  (gam  go),  pant  (pa 
drinh). 

a.  Irregularities. — In  the  pi-es.  part,  the  initial  a  of  as  he  and  the 
medial  a  of  han  slaij  are  lost  :  sant  (3.  pi.  santi),  ghn-ant  (3.  pi.  ghn- 
dnti);  while  the  n  of  the  suffix  is  lost  in  das-at  worshipping  and  sas-at ' 
(3.  pi.  sas-ati).  The  n  is  also  lost  in  the  s  aor.  part,  of  dah  ham  : 
dfiks-at  and  dhdks-at.  Whether  it  was  also  lost  in  s^ks-at,  the  part, 
of  the  same  aor.  from  sah  prevail,  is  uncertain  because  it  is  only  met 
with  in  a  weak  case. 

157.  The  reduplicated  perfect  participle  is  formed 
from  the  weak  (but  uucontracted  or  unsyncopated)  stem  to 
which  the  suffix  vams  is  directly  added.  There  are  more 
than  fifty  such  stems.  Examples  are :  cakr-vams,  jagan- 
vams  (gam  go),  tastabh-vams  (stambh  prop),  tasthi-vams 
(stha  stand),  dadrs-vains,  dad-vams  (da  give),  ba-bhu-vams, 
vavrt-vams,  sasa-varns  (san  gain),  susup-vams  (svap 
sleep). 

a.  Some  half-dozen  of  these  participles  are  formed  by 
adding  the  suffix  with  connecting  i  to  the  reduplicated  stem 
contracted  to  a  single  syllable :  i-y-i-varns  (i  go) ;  iis-i-vams 
(vas  dwell) ;  ok-i-vams "  (uc  &e  pleased) ;  papt-i-vams  (pat 
fall) ;  sasc-i-vams  (sac  follow) ;   in  the  later  Sainhitas  also 


'  Both  da^  and  sas  belong  to  the  root,  and  not  the  reduplicating 
class. 
2  With  strong  radical  vowel  and  reversion  to  the  original  guttural. 


182  CONJUGATION  [157-158 

jaks-i-vams  (ghas  eaf).^  The  only  certain  example  of  a  perf. 
part,  adding  the  suffix  with  connecting  i  to  the  fully 
reduplicated  stem  is  vivis-i-vams  (TS.).^ 

h.  A  few  perfect  participles  are  formed  by  attaching  vams 
to  the  unreduplicated  stem  :  das-vams  ivorshipping,  vid-vams 
knoiving,  sah-vams  prevailing,  and  perhaps  khid-vams^ 
oppressing.  Similarly  formed  is  midh-vams  bountiful,  though 
the  root  does  not  occur  in  independent  use.  Three  un- 
reduplicated roots  take  connecting  i  in  the  later  Samhitas : 
das-i-vams  (SV.)  worshipping,  vis-i-vams  (AV.)  entering, 
vai'j-i-vams ''  (AV.)  having  twisted. 

a.  Irregularities. — In  seven  steins  the  palatal  reverts  to  the  original 
guttural  :  cikit-vams  (\/cit),  jigi-vams  (\/ji),  ririk-vams  (Vric), 
ruruk-vams  (Vruc),  vivik-vams  vVvic),  susuk-vams  (Vsuc),  ok-i- 
vams  (v/uc).  The  radical  vowel  is  strong  in  dada-vams  (AV.),  ok-i- 
vams,  sah-vams  ;  while  the  reduplicative  vowel  is  long  in  sasah- 
vams  and  susu-vams  (Vsu). 

II.    Middle  and  Passive  Participles. 

158.  The  participles  of  the  future  middle,  of  the  present 
passive,  and  the  present  middle  of  the  a  conjugation  are 
formed  by  adding  the  suffix  mana  to  the  stem  (which 
always  ends  in  a);  e.g.  fut.  mid.  yaksya-mana  (Vyaj); 
pres.  pass,  kriya-mana  (-/kr);  pros.  mid.  yaja-mana. 

a.  Verbs  of  the  second  conjugation  add  the  suffix  ana  to 
the  weak  stem  in  the  j)res.  mid.  ;  e.g.  bruv-ana  {Vhvu), 
juhv-ana  (-/hu),  rundh-ana  (Vrudh),  krnv-ana  (v^kr), 
pun-ana  (Vpu). 

«.  There  are  several  irregularities  in  the  formation  of  the  middle 
pai'ticiples  of  the  root  class.  1.  The  root  as  sit  optionally  takes  the 
anomalous  suffix  ina  :   as-ina  beside  as-ana.     2.  The  final  of  the  root 


1  jaks  syncopated  for  jagh(a)s. 

-  In  B.  are  also  found  dadrs-i-vams  and  cichid-i-vams. 

2  Occurring  only  in  the  voc.  khidvas. 
*  Presupposed  by  the  fern,  varjusi. 


158-160]  PERFECT   PARTICIPLES  183 

duh  milk  optionally  reverts  to  the  original  guttural  :  diigh-ana  beside 
the  regular  duh-ana.  3.  A  few  roots  take  Guna  :  oh-and  (Vuh), 
yodh-an£  (Vyudh),  s4y-ana  (Vsi)>  stav-and.  (■v/stu).  4.  Several  of 
thes^e  participles  optionally  accent  the  radical  syllable  instead  of  the 
final  vowel  of  the  suffix  ;  e.  g.  vid-ana  beside  vid-anfi. 

159.  The  Perfect  Middle  Participle  is  formed  by  adding 
the  suffix  -ana  to  the  weak  form  of  the  stem  as  it  appears 
before  the  ending  of  the  3.  pi.  mid.  re  (ire,  rire).  It  is 
common,  more  than  eighty  examples  occurring.  The  follow- 
ing are  some  of  them  :  anaj-ana  ( v/afij),  anas-ana  (v/ams), 
ar-ana  {Vr),  ij-ana  (\/yaj),  uc-ana  (\/vac),  cakr-ana 
(%  kr),  cikit-ana  {/cit),  jagm-ana  (Vgam),  tasth-and 
(Vstha),  tistir-ana  (V'stf),  tep-ana  (\/tap),  pap-ana  (pa 
clrinJc),  paspas-ana  (\/spas),  bhej-ana  (s/bhaj),  yem-ana 
(\/yam),  lebh-ana  (-/labh),  vavas-ana  (vas  wear  anddwell), 
sisriy-ana  (A/sri),  sismiy-ana(V'smi),  susup-ana  (\/svap). 

a.  Irregularities. — 1.  This  participle  of  si  lie  has  the  double  anomaly 
of  reduplicating  with  a  and  of  strengthening  tlie  radical  syllable  :  ^ 
sasay-an6.  2.  The  root  sail  prevail  adds  the  suffix  to  a  reduplicated  as 
well  as  to  a  contracted  stem  :  sasah-ana  and  seh-ana.  3.  The  radical 
vowel  of  kam  love  and  sam  labour  is  not  syncojjated  :  cakam-an^  and 
sasam-ana.  4.  Four  of  these  participles  have  the  intensive  accent  on 
the  reduplicative  syllable  :  tutuj-ana'^,  susuj-ana,  siisuv-ana  (-y/sii), 
and  sasad-ana'^  {seid  prevail).* 

160.  The  Perfect  Passive  Participle  is  formed  by  adding, 
in  the  great  majority  of  instances,  the  suffix  ta  (with  or 
without  connecting  i)  or,  far  less  commonly,  the  suffix  na 
(directly)  to  the  root. 


^  Cp.  a  similar  irregularity  of  si  in  184,  1  b. 

^  Also  normally,  but  less  frequently,  accented  txituj-ana. 

^  Cp.  the  Gk.  perf.  mid.  part.  KeKaS-ixevo-s. 

*  The  first  three  cannot  be  accounted  intensives  because  they  have 
not  the  intensive  reduplicative  vowel  (173,  1).  Though  the  redupli- 
cative vowel  of  sasad-ana  may  bo  that  of  either  perfect  or  intensive, 
the  occurrence  of  the  perf.  form  sasadiir  beside  it  favours  the  view 
that  it  is  a  perf.  participle. 


184  CONJUGATIONS  [160 

1.  na,  which  is  taken  by  primary  verbs  only,  is  attached 
to  the  (unweakened)  root,  which  ends  in  a  long  vowel  or  one 
of  the  consonants  d  and  (rarely)  c  or  j.  Before  this  suffix, 
i  and  u  remain  unchanged  ;  a  remains  or  is  reduced  to  i  or  i  ; 
f  becomes  xr  or  (generally  when  a  labial  precedes)  ur  ;  d  is 
assimilated  to  n ;  c  and  j  revert  to  the  original  guttural. 
Thus  li  cling  :  li-na  ;  du  hum :  du-na  ;  dra  sleep  :  dra-na  ; 
da  tlivide  :  di-na  ;  ha  leave  :  hi-na  ;  gr  swallow  :  gir-na  ; 
mr  crush:  mur-na ;  jr  waste  away:  jur-na ;  bhid  S2)l'it: 
bhin-na;  skand  leap:  skan-na ;  vrasc  cut  up:  vrk-na ; 
ruj  hreaJ: :  rug-na. 

«.  Several  roots  take  alternative  forms  iu  ta  :  nun-na  aucl  nut-ta 
(Vnud)  ;  vin-na  and  vit-td  (vid  find) ;  san-na-  and  sat-ta  (sad  sit) ; 
si-n^  and  si-ta  (sya  coagulate) ;  pr  fill :  pur-na  and  pur-ta ;  sr  cmsh  : 
sir-nd,  and  sur-ta ;  pre  viix  :  -prg-na  and  prk-ta. 

b.  The  final  palatal  of  pro  viix,  vrasc  cut  up  and  ruj  break  reverts  tO 
the  guttural  (cp.  160,  1). 

2.  When  ta  is  added  direct  the  root  tends  to  appear  in  its 
weak  form  :  verbs  liable  to  Samprasarana  take  it ;  a  medial 
or  final  nasal  is  lost ;  a  is  often  reduced  to  i  or  i ;  ya  some- 
times to  i.  Examples  are  :  ya-ta,  ji-ta,  bhi-ta,  stu-ta, 
hu-ta,  kr-ta;  nas-ta  (\/nas  he  lost),  sik-ta  (7 sic),  yuk-ta 
(^^yuj),  gu-dha(N/guh)/  dug-dha  (A/duh),  srs-ta  (/sfj) ; 
is-ta  (\/yaj),  vid-dha  (^/vyadh),  uk-ta  (/vac),  u-dha 
(Vvah),-' sup-ta(v/svap),  prs-ta  (Vprach) ;  ak-ta  (/anj), 
ta-ta  (-v/tan),  ga-ta  (/gam);  pi-ta  (pa  drinJi),  sthi-ta 
(V'stha);  vi-ta(\/vy&). 

a.  The  root  dha  pitt  is  doubly  weakened  in  hi-tfi  beside  -dhi-ta. 
Medial  a  is  reduced  to  i  in  sis-ta  (sas  order).  Syncopation  and  loss  of 
s  appear  in  -g-dha  eaten  (^ghas).^ 

b.  Excepting  the  occurrence  of  the  normal  form  -data  in  the  com- 
pound tva-data  given  by  thee,  da  give  regularly  uses  the  weak  pres. 


1  With  corebralization  and  aspiration  of  the  suffix,  loss  of  the  radical 
final  and  lengthening  of  the  radical  vowel  (cp.  62,  69  c). 

"  With  the  same  changes  as  in  gudha  after  vah-ta  has  been  reduced 
by  Samprasarana  to  uh-t^.  *  Cp.  p.  170,  note  7. 


160-lGi]       PERFECT  PASSIVE  PARTICIPLE  185 

stem  dad  in  forming  its  past  passive  participle  :  dat-ta.  The  latter  is 
further  reduced  to  -tta  in  deva-ttfi.  given  by  the  gods,  and  when  com- 
bined with  certain  jn-epositions  :  vy-a-tta  opened,  pari-tta  giveyi  awmj, 
prati-tta  given  back.  The  same  syncopation  appears  in  the  compound 
participle  of  da  divide  :  dva-tta  cut  off. 

c.  One  root  in  an  and  three  or  four  in  am  retain  the  nasal  and 
lengthen  the  vowel :  dhvan  sound :  dhvan-ta  ;  kram  stride  :  kran-td  ; 
sam  be  quiet:  san-t^  ;  sram  be  ivearg  :  sran-ta ;  dham  blois  has  the 
irregular  dhma-td  and  dham-i-td.. 

d.  A  few  roots  in  an  have  a  '■ :  khan  dig  :  kha-t^  ;  jan  be  born  :  ja-td  ; 
van  ivin  :  -va-ta  ;  san  gain  :  sa-ta. 

3.  i-ta  is  taken  by  a  considerable  number  of  roots  ending 
not  only  in  conjunct  consonants  or  in  single  consonants 
difficult  to  combine  with  t,  but  also  in  simple  consonants, 
especially  sibilants,  which  present  no  such  difficulty.  The 
root  is  not  weakened  (excepting  four  instances  of  Sampra- 
sarana).  Secondary  verbs  (almost  without  exception  causa- 
tives)  -  take  ita  exclusively  (after  dropping  aya).^ 

Examples  are :  nind-ita,  raks-ita ;  grath-ita,  il-ita, 
car-ita,  jiv-ita  ;  pat-ita,  pan-ita ;  kup-ita,  stabh-ita ; 
mus-ita ;  arp-ita  *  (arp-aya  cause  to  go),  cod-ita  (cod-aya 
66^  in  motion). 

a.  The  roots  taking  Samprasarana  are:  grabh  and  grab. 
seize :  grbh-i-ta  and  grh-i-ta  (AV.);^  vaks  increase:  uks-ita ; 
vad  s;peuh :  nd-ita ;  srath  slacJcen :  srth-ita. 

161.  There  is  once  found  in  the  AV.  a  perfect  passive 
participle  extended  with  the  possessive  suffix  vant,  which 
gives  it  the  sense  of  a  perfect  participle  active :  asita-vant 
having  eaten.*^ 


'  Representing  the  long  sonant  nasal. 

2  Only  one  perfect  participle  passive  has  been  noted  from  a  desidera- 
tive  ;  mimam-s-ita  called  in  question,  and  one  from  a  denominative  : 
bham-it6  enraged. 

^  In  B.  jnapaya,  causative  of  jiia  know,  forms  its  part,  without  con- 
necting i:  jnap-td. 

<  Usually  (and  abnormally)  accented  ax'p-ita. 

5  With  i  for  i  as  in  some  other  forms  from  this  root. 

^  This  type  of  participle  hardly  occurs  even  in  the  Brahmanas. 


186  CONJUGATION  [162 

162.  The  Future  Passive  Participle  is  in  the  KV.  formed 
with  four  suffixes:  one  with  the  primary  suffix  ya,  which  is 
common,  the  rest  with  the  secondary  suffixes  ay-ya,  6n-ya, 
and  tv-a,  each  of  which  occurs  ahout  a  dozen  times.  In  the 
AV.  there  begin  to  be  vised  two  other  gerundives,  formed 
with  tavya  and  aniya,  each  occurring  twice.  All  these 
participles  correspond  in  sense  to  the  Lat,  gerundive 
in  -ndus. 

1.  In  the  EV.  about  forty  examples  of  the  gerundive  in 
ya  occur,  and  about  twenty  more  in  the  AV.  The  suffix  is 
nearly  always  to  be  read  as  ia,  which  accounts  for  the 
treatment  before  it  of  final  radical  vowels.  The  root,  being 
accented,  appears  in  a  strong  form  excepting  a  few  examples 
which  have  the  short  radical  vowel  i,  u,  or  r. 

«.  Final  a  coalesces  with  the  initial  of  ia  to  e,  between  which  and 
the  following  a  a  phonetic  y  is  interposed  :  da  give  :  deya  ( =  da-i-y-a) 
to  he  given. 

b.  Final  i,  u,  r  regularly  take  Guna  or  Vrddhi,  the  final  element 
of  which  always  appears  as  y,  v,  r,  as  before  a  vowel  ;  e.  g.  li  cling  : 
-lay-ya  ;  nu  praise  :  ndv-ya  ;  bhii  be  :  bhav-ya  and  bhav-y5  future  ; 
hii  call :  h^v-ya  ;  vr  choose :  var-ya. 

c.  Medial  i,  u,  r,  if  followed  by  a  single  consonant,  may  take  Guna 
and  a  may  be  lengthened  ;  e.  g.  dvis  :  dves-ya  hateful ;  yudh  :  yodh-ya 
to  be  subdued  ;  rdh  :  drdh-ya  to  be  accomplished  ;  mrj  :  marj-ya  to  be 
purified ;  vac  :  vac-ya  to  be  said  ;  but  also  giih-ya  to  be  concealed ;  -dhrs-ya 
to  be  assailed  ;  -sad-ya  to  be  seated. 

d.  A  final  short  vowel  sometimes  remains  unchanged,  a  t  being 
then  interposed  :  i-t-ya  to  be  gone  ;  sru-t-ya  to  be  heard  ;  -br-t-ya  to  be 
made  ;  carkf-t-ya  to  be  praised, 

2.  The  suffix  ayya,  nearly  always  to  be  read  ayia,  is 
almost  restricted  to  the  RV.  ;  e.  g.  pan-ayya  to  he  admired ; 
vid-ajja,  to  be  found  ;  sva,v-a,jya  glorious.  It  is  sometimes 
attached  to  secondary  stems  ;  to  a  causative :  pauay-ayya 
admirable,  sprhay-ayya  desirable ;  to  a  desiderative :  di- 
dhi-s-ayya  to  be  conciliated  ( \/dha) ;  to  an  intensive :  vi-tan- 
tas-ayya  to  be  hastened. 

3.  enya  (generally  to  be  read  6nia)  is  attached  to  the  root, 


162-163]  GERUNDIVE  187 

which  remains  unaltered  except  when  it  ends  in  a  vowel : 
thus  dvis-enya  malignant,  yud.h-6nya  to  he  combatted,  drs- 
enya  worthy  to  he  seen ;  but  var-enya  choiceivorthij  (vr  choose). 
It  is  once  added  to  an  aor.  stem :  yam-s-enya  to  he  guided 
( v/yam).  Secondary  verbs  also  take  this  suffix ;  desideratives : 
didrks-6nya  ivorthij  to  he  seen,  susrus-6nya  deserving  to  he 
heard;  intensives:  marmrj-6nya  to  he  glorified,  vavrdh- 
6nya  to  he  glorified ;  denominatives :  sapar-6nya  to  he 
adored. 

4.  tv-a,  almost  restricted  to  the  RV.^  and  generally  to  be 
read  tua,  is  added  to  the  strong  form  of  the  root,  which  is 
accented.  Thus  kar-tva  to  he  made,  h6-tva  to  he  driven  on 
(\/hi),  so-tva  to  he  pressed  [Vsu],  vak-tva  to  he  said;  with 
connecting  i :  san-i-tva  to  he  -won ;  with  connecting  i : 
bhav-i-tva  -  future. 

5.  The  only  two  examples  in  V.  (both  occurring  in  AV.) 
of  the  gerundive  in  tavya,  which  in  both  cases  is  added 
with  connecting  i,  are  jan-i-tavya  to  he  horn  and  hims-i- 
tavya  to  he  injured.^ 

6.  The  only  examples  of  the  gerundive  in  aniya  (both 
appearing  in  the  AV.)  are  upa-jiv-aniya  to  he  subsisted  on 
and  a-mantr-aniya  ivorthy  to  he  addressed.^ 

III.    Gerund  or  Indeclinable  Participle. 

163.  More  than  120  examples  of  the  gerund  occur  in 
the  RV.  and  AV.  It  expresses  an  action  which  accompanies 
or  more  often  precedes  that  of  the  finite  verb.  It  is  formed 
with  the  three  suffixes  tvi,  tva,  tvaya  (all  old  cases  of  stems 


1  A  few    examples  occur  in  the   Brahmanas  :   j^-tva   ( ji  conquer), 
sna-tva  (sna  bathe),  ban- tva  (han  slay). 
^  With  i  instead  of  i. 

*  This  gerundive   has  become  not  uncommon  in  B.,  where   it   is 
formed  not  only  from  the  root,  but  from  secondary  stems. 

*  In  B.  nearly  a  dozen  examples  have  been  met  with. 


188  CONJUGATION  [163 

in  tu  which  is  also  used  to  form  infinitives)  attached  to  the 
simple  root. 

1.  The  form  in  tvi,  which  is  almost  restricted  to  the  EV./ 
is  the  commonest  of  the  three  in  that  Samhita,  where  fifteen 
examples  occvu-.  It  probably  represents  an  old  locative  of 
stems  in  tu.  It  is  as  a  rule  added  directly  to  the  root, 
which  has  the  same  form  as  in  the  perf.  pass,  participle 
in  ta.  Examples  are :  kr-tvi  having  made,  ga-tvi  liavmj 
gone,  gu-dhvi  having  hidden,  bhu-tvi  having  become,  vrk-tvi 
having  overthroivn  (-/vrj),  hi-tvl  having  abandoned  (v^ha). 
There  are  two  forms  in  which  the  suffix  is  added  with  the 
connecting  vowel  i :  jan-i-tvi  having  produced  and  skabh-i-tvi 
having  propped. 

2.  The  suffix  tv-a  (an  old  inst.  sing,  of  a  verbal  noun  in  tu) 
is  taken  by  nine  roots  in  the  RV.  and  about  thirty  more  in 
the  AV.    The  root  has  the  same  form  as  before  the  ta  of  the 
perf.  pass,  participle.     The  forms  occurring  in  the  EV.  are : 
pi-tva  (pa  drinJc),  bhit-tva  having  shattered,  bhu-tva  having 
become,  mi-tva  having  formed  (v^ma),  yuk-tva  having  yolced, 
vr-tva  having  covered,  sru-tva  having  heard,  ha-tva  having 
slain,  hi-tva  having  abandoned.     Some  of  the  forms  from  the 
AV.  are:  is-tva  having  sacrificed  (Vyaj),  jag-dhva  having 
devoured  (>/jaks),    tir-tva  having   crossed    (Vtr),    tr-dhva 
having  shattered  (-/trh),  dat-tva  having  given  ( v'da),  pak-tva 
having  cooked  (v^pac),   bad-dhva  having  bound  (v^bandh), 
bhak-tva  having  divided  (^/bhaj),  ru-dhva  having  ascended 
(■/ruh),   vrs-tva  having  ctd  up  (\/vrase),  sup-tva  having 
slept  (V'svap) ;  three  take  the  conned  ing  vowel  i  :  cay-i-tva 
noting  (Vcay),  hims-i-tva  having  injured,  grh-i-tva  having 
seised ;  a  few  also  are  formed  from  secondary  stems  in  aya 
(which  is  retained) ;  e.  g.  kalpay-i-tva  having  arranged. 

3.  The  rarest  gerund  is  that  in  tvaya,  which  is  formed 


1  This  gerundive  is  not  found  in  the  AV.,  but  it  has  not  entirely 
disappeared  in  the  Bralimanas. 


163-164]  GERUND  189 

from  only  eight  roots  in  the  RV.' :  ga-tvaya  having  gone, 
jag-dhvaya  having  devoured,  dat-tvaya  having  given,  drs- 
tvaya  having  seen,  bhak-tvaya  having  attained,  yuk-tvaya 
having  yoled,  ha-tvaya  having  slain,  hi-tvaya  having  aban- 
doned ;  three  more  of  these  gerunds  appear  in  the  Yajurveda : 
kr-tvaya  having  done,  ta-tvaya  having  stretched,  vr-tvaya 
having  covered. 

164.  When  the  verb  is  compounded  the  suffix  is  regularly 
either  ya  or  tya.  In  at  least  two-thirds  of  such  forms  the 
vowel  of  the  suffix  is  long  in  the  RV.  The  root  is  always 
accented. 

1.  ya  is  added  (but  never  with  i)  to  the  root,  which  has 
the  same  form  as  before  tva,  except  that  final  a  and  am 
remain  unchanged.  Nearly  forty  roots  in  the  RV.  and 
about  thirty  more  in  the  AV.  form  these  compound  gerunds. 
Examples  from  the  RV.  are :  ac-ya  bending  {=  a-ac-),  abhy- 
up-ya  having  enveloped  (Vvap),  abhi-kram-ya  approaching, 
abhi-gur-ya  graciously  accepting  (gr  sing),  sam-grbh-ya 
gathering,  ni-cay-ya  fearing,  vi-tur-ya  driving  forth  (-/tr), 
a-da-ya  talcing,  ati-div-ja plajjing  higher,  Sinu-dfs-ya,  looking 
along,  a-rabh-ya  grasping,  ni-sad-ya  having  sat  down  ;  from 
a  causative  stem  :  prarp-ya  setting  in  motion  (pra-arpaya). 
Examples  from  the  AV.  are :  ud-uh-ya  having  carried  tip 
(v^vah),  sam-gir-ya  stvallotving  up  (V'gr),  upa-dad-ya 
imtting  in  (-/da),  sam-bhu-ya  combining,  ut-tha-ya  arising 
(\/stha),  sam-siv-ya  having  sewed;  from  a  causative  stem : 
vi-bhaj-ya  having  apjwrtioned  (\/bhaj). 

a.  Three  roots  nre  found  in  the  RV.  compounded  with  adverbs  or 

substantives  :  punar-da-ya  giving  back,  mitha-spfdh-ya  vying  together, 
karna-grh-ya  seising  by  the  ear,  pada-gfh-ya  grasping  by  the  foot,  hasta- 
grh-ya  grasping  by  the  hand. 


1  This  gerund  occurs  twice  in  the  AV.  and  about  half  a  dozen  times 
in  B.  It  is  once  formed  from  a  causative  stem  in  the  SB. :  spaiS-ay-i- 
tvaya  (\/spas). 


190  CONJUGATION  [165-167 

165.  2.  tya  (nearly  always  with  long  vowel  in  the  RV.) 

is  added  instead  of  ya  to  compound  verbs  ending  in  a  short 

vowel ;  ^    e.  g.   6-tya  having   come   (a-i),   abhi-ji-tya  having 

conquered,  a-dv-tya  regarding,  apa-mi-tya"  having  borrowed, 

upa-sru-tya  having  overheard ;   with  adverbial  or  nominal 

prefix :   arani-kr-tya  having  made  read)),  akhkhali-kr-tya 

shouting,  namas-kr-tya  (AV.)  paying  homage. 

a.  The  analogy  of  these  verbs  is  followed  by  some  roots  ending  in 
n  or  m  preceded  by  a,  which  drop  the  nasal  as  in  the  j  erf.  pass.  part.  : 
vi-ha-tya  having  driven  away  (Vhan),  a-ga-tya  having  come  (Vgam), 
ud-ya-tya  (AV.)  lifting  up  (Vyam). 

166.  The  accusative  in  am  of  certain  verbal  nouns, 
though  not  yet  construed  like  a  gerund  in  the  Samhitas,  is 
not  infrequently  so  construed  in  the  Briihmanas  and  Sutras. 
Before  the  suffix,  the  root  (which  is  almost  always  com- 
pounded) appears  in  the  form  it  assumes  before  the  i  of  the 
3.  s.  aor.  pass.  (155) ;  e.g.  sakham  sam-a-lambh-am  tahing 
hold  of  a  &;-rtwc/?(SB.);  malianagam  abhi-sam-sar-am  running 
together  around  a  great  snaJce  (SB.). 

IV.    Infinitive. 

167.  The  infinitive,  all  the  forms  of  which  are  old  cases 
of  verbal  nouns,  ace,  dat.,  abl.-gen.,  orloc,  is  very  frequent, 
occurring  about  700  times  in  the  EV.  Only  the  ace.  and 
dat.  forms  are  common,  but  the  datives  outnumber  the  ace. 
in  the  proportion  of  12  to  1  in  the  RV.  and  3  to  1  in 
the  AV.  It  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  the  infinitive  in  turn, 
the  only  form  surviving  in  Sanskrit,  occurs  not  more  than 
five  times  in  the  RV.,  while  the  dative  infinitive,  which  in 
the  RV.  is  more  than  seven  times  as  common  as  all  the 
rest  put  together,  has  already  for  the  most  part  disappeared 
in  the  Brahmanas. 


1  Sometimes  not  original  but  reduced  from  a  long  vowel. 
^  Here  mi  is  reduced  from  ma  measure. 


167]  INFINITIVE  191 

a.  The  infinitive  is  as  a  rule  formed  from  the  root,  not  being 
connected  with  any  tense  stems  or  ever  showing  the  distinctions  of 
voice.  The  forms  in  dhyai,  i,se  and  s^ni  are,  however,  not  infrequently- 
connected  with  a  present  stem  ;  that  in  dhyai  is  once  formed  from 
a  pei-fect  stem,  and  is  also  in  several  instances  taken  by  causative 
stems.  The  forms  in  dhyai  and  tav&i  are  at  once  recognizable  as 
infinitives  by  their  abnormal  endings  ;  that  in  stoi,  though  it  has  an 
ordinary  case-ending,  by  its  isolated  stem-formation.  The  ace.  inf. 
in  tum  and  am  and  the  abl.  gen.  inf.  show  their  infinitive  character 
by  their  power  of  combining  with  prepositions  and  their  verbal 
construction.  Some  infinitives,  however,  cannot  be  distinguished 
from  ordinary  cases  of  verbal  nouns  :  they  are  not  to  be  regarded  as 
genuine  infinitives  unless  they  are  isolated  case  forms  or  have  a  verbal 
construction. 

1.    Dative  Infinitive. 

This  infinitive^  ends  in  e,  which  with  the  final  a  of  a  root 
or  stem  combines  to  ai.'^     It  is  formed  from  : 

a.  roots,  about  sixty  forms  occurring.  About  a  dozen  are 
formed  from  roots  ending  in  long  vowels  and  from  one  in  i, 
all  of  them  (except  an  alternative  form  of  bhu)  being  com- 
pounded with  prefixes  ;  e.  g.  para-dai  to  give  up,  pra-hy5 
to  send  (Vhi) ;  -miy-e  to  diminish  ( v'mi),  -bhv-e  and  bhuv-6 
to  he  ;  -tir-e  to  cross. 

The  rest  are  from  roots  ending  in  consonants.  About 
a  dozen  are  uncompounded,  as  mah-e  to  be  glad,  mih-e  to 
shed  ivafer,  bhuj-6  to  enjoy,  drs-6  to  see.  But  the  compounded 
forms  are  commoner;  e.g.  -grabh-e  to  seise,  -idh-e  to  kindle, 
-niid-e  to  thrust,  -preh-e  ^  to  ash,  -vae-e  ^  to  sjyeaJc,  -vidh-e  ^ 
to  pierce,  -syad-e  °  to  floiv.''' 

^  The  only  dat.  inf.  in  ordinary  use  in  B.  is  that  in  tavai.  Otherwise 
only  five  or  six  in  e  (see  note  6)  ;  two  in  tave,  av-i-tave  and  star- 
tave,  and  one  in  dhyai,  sa-dhyai  to  conquer  (-y/sah)  have  been  noted  in  B. 
Loc.  infinitives  have  disappeared. 

-  Excejit  srad-dhe  fo  Mist  and  pra-m6  to  form,  wliich  drop  the  a. 

^  With  Samprasarana. 

^  With  lengthened  vowel. 

•''  With  loss  of  nasal  (Vsyand). 

''  In  B.  have  been  noted  half  a  dozen  infinitives  in  e  from  roots 


192  CONJUGATION  [i67 

h.  verbal  nouns  derived  with  nine  different  suffixes. 
These  in  the  aggregate  are  more  numerous. 

1.  Some  twenty-five  are  datives  of  stems  in  as ;  ^  e.  g. 
ay-as-e  to  go,  caks-as-e  to  see,  ear-as-e  to  fare,  pusy-as-e 
to  thrive,  bhiy-as-e  to  fear,  sriy-as-e  to  he  resplendent. 

2.  Five  or  six  datives  of  stems  in  i  are  found  in  the  RV., 
and  one  or  two  in  other  Samhitas ;  tuj-aye  to  breed,  drs-ay-e 
to  see,  mah-ay-e  to  rejoice,  yudh-ay-e  to  fight,  san-ay-e  to 
irin:  grh-aye  to  seize  (K.),  cit-aye  to  nnderstand  (VS.). 

3.  Four  or  five  are  datives  of  stems  in  ti:  is-tay-e  to 
refresh,  pi-tay-e  to  drink,  vi-tay-e  to  enjoy,  sa-tay-e 
to  ivin. 

4.  More  than  thirty  are  datives  of  stems  in  tu"  (added  to 
the  gunated  root,  sometimes  with  connecting  i) ;  e.  g. 
at-tav-e  to  eat,  6-tav-e  to  go,  d-tav-e  to  weave  ('/u  =  va), 
kar-tav-e  to  male,  gan-tav-e  to  go,  pa-tav-e  to  drinl',  bhar- 
tav-e  to  hear  away,  yas-tav-e  to  sacrifice,  vak-tav-e  to  speak, 
vas-tav-e  to  shine,  v6-lhav-e  to  convey  (Vvah) ;  av-i-tav-e 
to  refresh,  car-i-tav-e  to  fare,  sav-i-tav-e  tohring  forth  (-/su), 
srav-i-tav-e  to  floiv  (/sru),  hav-i-tav-e  to  call  (\/hu); 
jiv-a-tav-e  to  lire,  star-i-tav-e  (AV.)  to  lay  low  (\/str). 

5.  More  than  a  dozen  are  datives  of  stems  in  tava  (which 
is  added  like  tu  to  the  gunated  root)  and  have  the  peculiarity 
of  being  doubly  accented  ;  e.  g.  6-tavai  to  go,  6-tavai  to 
weave,  gan-tavai  to  go,  pa-tavai  to  drinl;  man-tavai  to  think, 
sar-tavai  to  flcnv ;  yam-i-tavai  to  guide,  srav-i-tavai  to 
flow. 


ending  in  consonants,  all  but  one  being  compounded  :  drs-§  (TS.)  to 
see,  prati-dhfs-e  to  withstand  (TS.),  pra-mrad-e  to  crush  (SB.),  a-r^bh-e 
to  take  hold  (SB.),  a-sad-e  to  sit  upon  (AB.),  ati-sfp-e  to  glide  over  (MS.). 
All  these  excejit  pra-mrad-e  occur  in  the  RV. 

*  Which  is  generally  accented,  but  about  half  a  dozen  examples 
accent  the  root. 

2  The  only  examples  of  this  infinitive  noted  in  B.  are  dvitave  and 
startave. 


167]  DATIVE  INFINITIVE  193 

a.  This  infinitive  is  still  in  regular  use  in  B.,  where  the  following 
examples  have  been  noted  :  6tavdi  and  yatavdi  (o  go,  kartavdi  to  do, 
d6diyitavai  to  Jly  aicuy,  drogdhavdi  to  x)lot,  m^ntavai  to  think,  md.nthi- 
tavdi  to  rule,  stdrtavdi  to  lay  low,  ati-caritavdi  to  transgress,  a-netav&i  to 
bring,  nir-astavai  to  throiu  out,  pdri-staritavdi  to  strew  around,  sam- 
hvayitavai  to  call  together . 

6.  There  is  only  one  certain  example  of  a  dative  infinitive 
from  a  stem  in  tya :  i-tyai  to  go. 

7.  More  than  thirty-five  are  datives  (almost  restricted  to 
the  KV.)  of  stems  in  dhya,  which  is  added  to  verbal  stems 
ending  in  a  (generally  accented) ;  e.  g.  iya-dhyai  to  go  {Vi), 
gama-dhyai  to  go,  cara-dhyai  to  fare,  saya-dhyai  to  lie 
(s/si),  stava-dhyai  to  praise  (v/stu);  piba-dhyai  to  drink 
( v/pa),  prna-dhyai  to  fill  ( v^pr),  huva-dhyai  to  call  ( -/hu) ;  ^ 
vavrdha-dhyai  ^  to  strengthen ;  nasaya-dhyai  ^  to  cause  to 
disappear,  vartaya-dhyai  ^  to  cause  to  turn. 

a.  Only  one  of  these  infinitives  has  been  noted  in  B. :  sadhyai  to 
conquer  (\/sah).  In  the  TS.  occurs  one  example  ending  in  e  instead 
of  ai  :  gamd-dhye  to  go. 

8.  Five  are  datives  of  stems  in  man  :  tra-man-e  to  protect, 
da-man-e  to  give  (Gk.  S6ix€u-ai),  dhar-man-e  to  support, 
bhar-man-e  to  preserve,  vid-man-e  (Gk.  i'S-fx^v-ai)  to  Motu. 

9.  Three  are  datives  of  stems  in  van :  tur-van-e  to  over- 
come (Vtr),  da- van- e  (Gk.  Sovvat  =  Sofevai)  to  give,  dhur- 
van-e  *  to  injure. 

2.    Accusative  Infinitive. 

This  infinitive  is  formed  in  two  ways. 

a.  One  of  them  (of  which  more  than  a  dozen  examples 
occur  in  the  RV.  besides  several  others  in  the  AV.)  is  made 
with  am  added  to  the  weak  form  of  the  root,  which  nearly 


1  The  last  three  are  made  from  regular  present  stems. 
-  From  the  reduplicated  perfect  stem. 

^  From  the  causative  stem,  from  which  about  ten  such  infinitives 
are  formed. 

*  With  interchange  of  vowel  and  semivowel  ;  ur  =  vr,     Cp.  171.  2. 

1819  O 


194  CONJUGATION  [i67 

always  ends  in  a  consonant  (except  dha,  mi,  tr) ;  e.  g. 
sam-idh-am  to  Jcindle,  sam-preii-ani  to  asJc,  a-rabh-am  to 
reach,  a-riih-am  to  mount,  siibh-am  to  shine  ;  pra-tir-am 
to  ])rolong  [Vtv],  prati-dha-m  to  x^lace  upon,  pra-miy-am  to 
neglect  (\/mi). 

1).  The  second  foi-m  which  is  made  from  stems  in  tu 
(=  Lat.  supine)  is  much  less  common  than  the  datives  from 
the  same  stems.  Only  five  examples  occur  in  the  EV.  and 
about  as  many  others  in  the  AV.  ;  EV. :  6 -turn  to  weave,  da- 
tum to  give  (Lat.  da-turn),  pras-tum  to  ask,  pra-bhar-tum 
to  present,  anu-pra-volhum  to  advance  ;  AV. :  at-tum  to  eat, 
kar-tum  to  maJce,  dras-tum  to  see,  yac-i-tum  to  as7i, 
spardh-i-tum  to  contend  with ;  K.,  VS. :  khan-i-tum  to  dig. 

a.  The  aec.  inf.  has  become  nearly  twice  as  frequent  as  the  dat.  in  B. 
The  form  in  am  is  not  imusual,  while  that  in  turn  is  quite  common. 

3.  Ablative- Genitive  Infinitive. 

This  infinitive  is  rare,  fewer  than  twenty  examples  occur- 
ring in  the  Samhitas.  It  is  rather  of  the  nature  of  a  verbal 
noun  than  a  genuine  infinitive.  Like  the  ace.  infinitive  it 
is  formed  in  two  ways  :  from  a  radical  (consonant)  stem  and 
from  a  verbal  noun  in  tu.  It  thus  ends  either  in  as  or  tos ; 
and  as  each  of  these  endings  represents  both  the  abl.  and 
the  gen.,  the  cases  can  only  be  distinguished  syntactically. 

a.  The  as  form  has  the  abl.  sense  almost  exclusively. 
There  are  six  examples  of  it  in  the  EV. :  a-trd-as  heing 
pierced,  ava-pad-as  falling  doivn,  sam-prc-as  coming  in  con- 
tact, abhi-sris-as  binding,  abhi-svas-as  hlotving,  ati-skad-as 
leaping  across.  There  seems  to  be  one  certain  example  of 
the  gen.  :  ni-mis-as  to  wink. 

h.  Of  the  tos  form  the  EV.  has  six  examples  in  the  abl. 
sense :  6-tos  and  gan-tos  going,  jan-i-tos  being  horn, 
ni-dha-tos  putting  doivn,  sar-i-tos  heing  shattered,  s6-tos 
'pressing,  han-tos  heing  struck.  Three  examples  in  the  gen. 
sense  are  :  kar-tos  doing,  da-tos  giving,  jd-tos  ivarding  ojf. 

a.  The  abl.  gen.  inf.  has  become  as  common  as  the  dat.  in  B. 


I(i7-I6sj  LOCATIVE   INFINITIVE  195 

4.   Locative  Infinitive. 

This  form  of  the  infinitive  is  rare ;  hardly  more  than 
a  dozen  examples  occur  even  if  several  doubtful  forms  are 
included. 

a.  Five  or  six  are  locatives  of  radical  stems :  vy-us-i  at 
the  daicning,  sam-caks-i  on  leholdmj,  drs-i  and  sam-drs-i 
on  seeing,  budh-i  at  the  tcaldng.  As  these  forms,  however, 
have  nothing  distinctive  of  the  infinitive  and  govern  the 
genitive  only,  they  are  rather  to  be  regarded  as  ordinary 
locatives  of  verbal  nouns. 

J).  From  a  stem  in  tar  are  formed  dhar-tar-i  to  support 
and  vi-dhartar-i  to  bestoiv  ;  it  is,  however,  doubtful  whether 
these  forms  are  genuine  infinitives. 

c.  The  EV.  has  eight  locatives  from  stems  in  san,  with 
a  genuine  infinitive  sense:  ne-san-i  to  lead,  par-san-i  to 
pass,  abhi-bhu-san-i  to  aid,  su-san-i  to  sivell,  sak-san-i 
to  abide  (\/sac);  with  connecting  i:  tar-i-san-i ;  from 
jjresent  stems  :  gr-ni-sani  to  sing,  str-ni-san-i  to  spread. 

DERIVATIVE    VERBS. 
I.   Causatives. 

168.  This  is  by  far  the  commonest  of  the  secondary 
conjugations,  being  formed  from  more  than  two  hundred 
roots  in  the  Samhitfis  and  from  about  a  hundred  additional 
ones  in  the  Brahmanas.  Of  about  150  causative  stems 
in  the  KV.,  however,  at  least  one-third  have  not  a  causative, 
but  an  iterative  sense.  The  whole  formation  may  indeed 
originally  have  had  an  iterative  meaning.  This  perhaps 
explains  how  an  iterative  formation,  the  reduplicated  aorist, 
specially  attached  itself  to  the  causative.  The  same  root 
occasionally  forms  both  the  iterative  and  the  causative,  as 
pat-aya-ti  flies  about  and  pat-aya-ti  causes  to  flij  beside  the 
simi:)le  verb  pata-ti  flies. 

o2 


196  CONJUGATION  [i68 

The  causative  is  formed  by  adding  the  suffix  aya  to  the 
root,  which  is  usually  strengthened. 

1.  Initial  or  medial  i,  u,  r,  1  (if  not  long  by  position)  take 
Guna ;  e.  g.  vid  Imoiv :  ved-aya  cause  to  know ;  krudh  he 
angry:  krodh-aya  enrage;  rd  dissolve  (intr.):  ard-aya 
destroy  ;  trp  lie  pleased :  tarp-aya  delight ;  kip  he  adapted : 
kalp-aya  arrange. 

a.  Several  roots,  mostly  lacking  the  causative  meaning, 
leave  the  radical  vowel  unchanged  ;  e.g.  rue  shine :  ruc-aya, 
id.  (but  roe-aya  illumine). 

h.  Initial  or  medial  a  (if  not  long  by  position)  is  lengthened 
in  about  thirty  roots;  e.g.  am  he  injurious:  am-aya  suffer 
injury  ;  nas  he  lost :  nas-aya  destroy. 

a.  In  the  following  roots  the  a  optionally  remains  short  in  the 
causative  :  gam  go,  das  icaste  mvay,  dhvan  disappear,  pat  Jlij,  mad  he 
exhilarated,  ram  rest ;  thus  pat  Jlij  :  pat-aya  Jly  about,  once  cause  to  Jhj, 
and  pat-iya  cause  to  Jly. 

P.  In  about  twenty-five  roots  the  a  always  remains  short,  the 
causative  meaning  being  mostly  absent ;  e.  g.  dam  control :  dam-aya 
id.  ;  jan  beget :  jan-aya  id. 

c.  Final  i,  u,  r  take  Guna  or  Vrddhi ;  e.  g.  ksi  2)0ssess : 
ksay-aya  ^  cause  to  dwell  securely ;  cyu  ivacer :  cyav-aya 
shaJcc ;  bhu  he  :  bhav-aya  cause  to  hecome ;  ghr  drip) :  ghar- 
aya  cause  to  drip ;  sru  hear,  jr  waste  away,  and  sr  flow  have 
Guna  as  well  as  Vrddhi:  srav-aya  and  srav-aya  cause  to 
hear ;  jar-aya  and  jar-aya  wear  out,  sar-aya  and  sar-aya 
cause  to  flow  ;  dr  pierce  has  Guna  only  :  dar-aya  shutter. 

d.  Koots  ending  in  a  add  paya ; "  e.  g.  dha  j^ut :  dha-paya 
cause  to  pnit. 

e.  The  causative  retains  the  suflfix  throughout  the  conju- 
gation even  outside  the  present  system.  Its  inflexion  is 
identical  with  that  of  the  primary  verbs  of  the  first  conju* 

1  The  only  example  of  a  causative  from  a  root  in  final  i  (except  the 
irregular  japdya  from  ji  conquer  and  srapaya  from  iSri  resort), 
^  As  to  other  routs  taking  paya  see  'Irregularities',  2. 


168]  CAUSATIVE  197 

gation (132).  Suhjunctive/  imperative,-  injunctive,  imperfect, 
and  present  participle  forms  are  common  ;  but  the  optative 
is  very  rare  in  the  active  and  does  not  occur  at  all  in  the 
middle.  Only  four  future  forms  occur  in  the  KV.  and  the 
AV. :  dusaj-isjimil  shall  spoil,  dharay-isyati  tvill  support, 
vasay-isyase  thou  tvilt  adorn  thyself,  varay-isyate  unll  shield. 
In  the  perfect  only  one  periphrastic  form  (139,  9  a)  occurs : 
gamayam  eakara-'  (AV.).  Keduplicated  aorist  forms  are 
connected  with  only  six  causative  stems  (p.  175,  a.  3).  There 
are  also  three  is  aorists  formed  from  the  causative  stem: 
vyathay-Ts  from  vyath-aya  dislnrh ;  ailay-it  from  il-aya 
qiiiet  down  ;  dhvanay-it  from  dhvan-aya  envelope.* 

f.  Of  nominal  derivatives  the  following  are  examples : 
a  pres.  pass.  part,  bhaj-ya-mana  ;  a  few  perf.  pass,  parti- 
ciples: ghar-i-ta  smeared,cod-i-%a,  impelled,  ves-i-ta  caused  to 
enter ;  a  few  gerundives  in  ayya  (162,  2) :  trayay-ayya  to  he 
guarded  ;  panay-ayya  admiraUe  ;  sprhay-ayya  desirable ; 
ten  infinitives  in  dhyai :  nasaya-dhyai  to  destroy,  &c. 
(p.  198,  7) ;  four  gerunds  in  the  AV.  :  arpay-i-tva  having 
delivered  up,  kalpay-i-tva  having  arranged,  saday-i-tva  having 
set  down,  sramsay-i-tva  letting  fall. 

Irregularities. 

1.  Three  causaf  ives  in  the  AV.  sliovten  the  a  before  paya  :  jna-paya 

canse  to  knoiv,  sra-paya  cook,  sna-pdya  hafhe  beside  sna-pdya  (RV.). 

2.  Four  roots  in  vowels  other  than  a,  that  is,  in  r  or  i,  take  paya; 
r  go :   ar-p4ya  cause  to  go  ;   ksi  chvell  :   kse-p4ya  cause  to  dive.ll  (beside 


1  The  only  du.  mid.  form  occurring  is  3.  madfiyaite  ;  and  the  only 
mid.  form  in  ai  (except  1.  du.)  in  the  RV.  is  madayadhvai. 

2  The  2.  s.  in  tat  occurs  in  both  V.  and  B. ;  and  from  vr  cover  occiu's 
the  unique  2.  pi.  varaya-dhvat  in  K. 

3  In  B.  such  forms  are  still  uncommon  except  in  the  SB.,  where 
they  are  numerous. 

*  In   B.   desideratives  are   formed   from   about   a  dozen   causative 
stems  ;  e.  g.  di-drapay-isa  desire  to  cause  to  run. 


198  CONJUGATION  [168-169 

ksay-5,ya) ;  ji  conquer  and  ^ri  reaort  stibstitute  a  for  i :  ja-p^ya  cause  1o 
conquer,  sra-p&ya  raise?- 

3  The  root  bhi  fear  forms  the  quite  anomalous  causative  stem 
bh  i  -  s  -  dy  a  /r  «^/«  fen . 

4.  The  roots  pa  drink  and  pya  swell  add  aya  with  interposed  y  : 
pay-fiya  cause  1o  drink  and  pyay-d,ya  fill  iip.  This  is  probably  to  be 
explained  by  the  assumption  that  the  original  form  of  these  roots  was 
pai  and  pyai. 

5.  The  vowel  of  grabh  (irasp  is  weakened  by  Samprasiirana :  grbh-fiya 
grasp ;  while  that  of  dus  spoil  is  lengthened :  diis-^ya,  id.  The 
root  pf.fiJl,  owing  to  its  initial  labial,  forms  its  causative  with  medial 
u  for  a  :  piir-^ya,  fulf  I. 


II.    Desideratives. 

169.  The  deslderative,  which  is  the  least  common  of  the 
secondary  conjugations,  is  formed  from  the  root  with  an 
accented  reduplicative  syllable  and  the  suffix  sa.  This  sa  is 
never  added  with  a  connecting  i  in  the  RV.,  nor,  with  the 
single  exception  of  pi-pat-i-sa,  in  the  AV,,  ji-jiv-i-sa  in  the 
VS.,  and  ji-gam-i-sa  in  the  TS.'  The  desiderative  is  formed 
from  fewer  than  sixty  roots  in  the  Samhitas  and  from  more 
than  thirty  additional  ones  in  B,  It  is  inflected  like  verbs 
of  the  first  conjugation  (132). 

The  accent  being  on  the  reduplicative  syllable,  the  root  as 
a  rule  remains  unchanged  ;  e.  g.  da  give :  di-da-sa  desire  to 
give  ;  bhid  cleave :  bi-bhit-sa  ;  ni  lead  :  ni-ni-sa ;  guh  hide  : 
ju-guk-sa  (62  a,  69  a) ;  bhu  he :  bu-bhu-sa  ;  drs  see :  di- 
drk-sa.     But 

1.  final  i  and  u  are  lengthened,  and  r  becomes  ir  ;  e.  g. 
ji  conquer:  ji-gi-sa ;  sru  hear:  su-sru-sa;  kr  mahe:  ci- 
kir-sa, 

2.  final  a  is  in  three  roots  reduced  (cp.  171,  3)  to  i  and  in 


'  In  B.  the  root  ruh.  rise,  even  though  ending  in  a  consonant,  takes 
paya  after  dropping  its  h  :  ro-paya  raise  (beside  roh-dya), 

^  In  B.  about  a  dozen  other  roots  form  their  desiderative  stem 
thus  ;  6,  g.  ei-kram-i-sa,  ji-grah-i-sa,  vi-vid-i-sa  (vid  know),  &c. 


169-171]  DESIDERATIVES  199 

one  to  i  :  ga  go:  ji-gi-sa  (SV.) ;  pa  drink:  pi-pi-sa  (beside 
pi-pa-sa) ;  ha  go  forth  :  ji-hi-sa  ;  dha  2)ut :  di-dhi-sa  (beside 
dhit-sa). 


Special  Rule  of  Reduplication. 

170.  The  characteristic  reduplicative  vowel  is  i,  which 
appears  in  all  stems  except  those  formed  from  roots  contain- 
ing u  (which  reduplicate  with  u) ;  e.  g.  jya  overpoiver : 
ji-jya-sa;  mis  mix:  mi-mik-sa;  pri?ovc:  pi-pri-sa;  vrt  turn: 
vi-vrt-sa  ;  but  guh  hide :  j\i-guk-sa ;  bhu  he  :  bu-bhu-sa. 


Irregularities. 

171.  1.  Five  roots  with  medial  a  followed  by  m  or  n  lengthen  the 

vowel  :  gam  go  :  ji-gam-sa ;  ban  smite :  ji'-gham-sa  (66  A  2)  ;  man 
think  lengthens  the  reduplicative  vowel  also:  mi-mam-sa  (66  A  2)  ; 
van  7vin  and  san  gain  drop  the  nasal  :  vi-va-sa  and  si-sa-sa, 

2.  dhvr  injure,  after  interchange  of  semivowel  and  vowel  to  ur, 
lengthens  its  u  :  dii-dhiir-sa.     Cp.  p.  193,  note  4, 

3.  Haifa  dozen  roots  cont„iniiig  a  or  a  shorten  the  radical  syllable 
by  a  kind  of  syncopation  :  da  give  and  dha  imt  lose  their  vowel : 
di'-t-sa  (=  di-d[a]-sa)  beside  di-da-sa  ;  dhf-t-sa  (  =  di-dh[a]-sa) 
beside  di-dhi-sa  ;  dabh  harm,  labh  take,  sak  6e  able,  sah  prevail  lose 
their  initial  radical  consonant  and  their  vowel :  di-p-sa  ^  (  =  di[da]bh- 
sa),  lip-sa^  (=  li[la]bh-sa),  sik-sa  (=  si[sa]k-sa),  sik-sa,  with 
lengthened  reduplicative  vowel  ( =  si[sa]k-sa).^ 

rt.  ap  obtain  and  rdh  thrive  (treated  as  ardh)  contract  the  redupli- 
cated i  with  the  radical  initial  to  i:  ip-sa  (=i-ap-sa)  and  irt-sa 
( =  i-ardh-sa). 

4.  In  ci  nrjte,  cit  perceive,  ji  conquer,  han  slay,  the  radical  initial 
reverts  to  the  original  guttural :  ci-ki-sa,  ci-kit-sa,  ji'-gi-sa,  jf- 
gham-sa. 


*  Also  dhipsa  in  B. 
'-  Also  lipsa  in  B. 

^  In  B.  are  similarly  formed  dhiksa  (dah  burn),   pitsa   ^pad  go), 
ripsa  (rabh  grasp). 


200  CONJUGATION  [171 

5.  ghas  eat  changes  its  final  s  to  t  (66  B  1)  :  ji-ghat-sa  (AV.)  be 
hungry. 

6,  Three  roots  reduplicate  with  a  long  vowel:  tur  cross  (=  tf)  : 
tu-tur-sa  ;  badh  oppress  :  bi-bhat-sa  ;  ^  man  think  :  mi-mam-sa.'^  On 
the  other  hand  the  reduplicative  syllable  is  reduced  in  the  desidei-ative 

f  yaj  sacrifice  and  nas  attain  by  loss  of  the  initial  consonant :  i-yak-sa 
(for  yi-yak-sa)  and  i-nak-sa  (for  ni-nak-sa).  In  one  form  from  ap 
obtain  the  reduplication  is  dropped  altogether :  ap-santa. 

a.  The  two  roots  with  initial  vowel  as  eat  and  edh  increase  form  their 
desiderative  stem  with  the  reduplicative  vowel  in  the  second  syllable  : 
a^-i^-i-sa  (B.)  and  ed-idh-i-sa  (VS.). 

In  the  inflexion  of  the  desiderative  all  the  moods  of  the 
present  system,  besides  the  imperfect,  are  represented, 
though  not  fully ;  and  of  present  participles  more  than 
twenty-five  examples  are  met  with.  The  forms  occurring, 
if  made  from  vi-va-sa  desire  to  win,  would  be  : 

Present  ind.  act.  sing.  1.  vivasami.  2.  vivasasi. 
3.  vivasati.  Du.  2.  vivasathas.  3.  vivasatas.  PI.  1. 
vivasamas.     3.  vivasanti. 

Mid.  sing.  1.  vivase.  2.  vivasase.  3.  vivasate. 
PI.  1.  vivasamahe.     3.  vivasante. 

Subj.  act.  sing.  1.  vivasani.    3.  vivasat.    PI.  3.  vivasan. 

Inj.  act.  sing.  3.  vivasat.     Mid.  pi.  3.  vivasanta. 

Opt.  act.  sing.  1.  vivaseyam.  3.  vivaset.  PI.  1.  vivase- 
ma.     Mid.  sing.  1.  vivaseya. 

Impv.  act.  sing.  2.  vivasa  and  vivasatat.  3.  vivasatu. 
Du.  2.  vivasatam.  3.  vivasatam.  PI.  2.  vivasata. 
3.  vivasantu. 

Part.  act.  vivasant.     Mid.  vivasamana. 

Impf.  act.  sing.  2.  avivasas.  3.  avivasat.  PI.  3. 
avivasan. 


*  With  shortening  of  the  radical  vowel. 
2  With  lengthening  of  the  radical  vowel. 


I 


171-172]  DESIDERATIVES  201 

a.  Outside  the  present  system  only  two  desiderative  verbal  forms  ^ 
have  been  met  with,  two  is  aorists  in  the  AV.  :  fi-cikits-is  and 
irts-is.'  Three  participial  forms  have  also  been  noted  :  the  perf. 
pass.  part,  mimams-i-td'  and  the  gerundives  didrks-enya  tvorthy  to  be 
seen  and  i5usrus-6nya  worthy  to  he  heard*  Finally,  over  a  dozen  verbal 
adjectives  formed  witli  u  from  the  desiderative  stem  occur  in  the  RV., 
e.  g.  iyaks-ii  wishing  to  sacrifice.  They  have  the  value  of  a  pres.  part. 
governing  a  case. 

III.    Intensives  (Frequentatives). 

172.  Tliese  verbs  are  meant  to  convey  intensification  or 
frequent  repetition  of  the  action  expressed  by  the  simple 
root.  They  are  common,  being  formed  from  over  ninety 
roots  in  the  Samhitas,  and  about  twenty-five  others  in  the 
Brahmanas.  The  formation  is  restricted  to  roots  with 
initial  consonants,  nor  is  it  ever  applied  to  derivative  verbs. 

The  stem,  of  which  a  peculiar  form  of  strong  reduplication 
is  characteristic,  has  two  forms.  The  primary  type,  which 
is  by  far  the  commonest,  adds  the  personal  endings  imme- 
diately to  the  reduplicated  stem  (accented  on  the  first  syllable 
in  strong  forms  :  App.  III.  12  e).  It  is  inflected,  in  both 
active  and  middle,  like  a  verb  of  the  third  or  reduplicated 
class  (132) ;  e.  g.  nij  tvash :  3.  sing.  n6-nek-ti.  The  secondary 
form,  which  is  rare,  adds  accented  yd  in  the  same  way  as 
the  passive  (154)  to  the  reduplicated  stem.  It  is  conjugated 
in  the  middle  only,  like  the  passive ;  e.  g.  vij  tremble : 
ve-vij-ya-te  fremUes  violenth/. 

1  In  B.  periphrastic  perfect  forms  from  five  or  six  desiderative 
stems  have  been  noted. 

■'  In  B.  is  aorists  from  half  a  dozen  desiderative  stems  occur  ;  e.  g. 
aips-it,  aips-is-raa,  a-jighams-is,  a-mimams-is-thas.  One  or  two 
simple  and  periphrastic  futures  also  occur  in  B.,  as  titiks-isyate  (tij 
he  sharp),  didrks-i-taras  (drs  see). 

3  In  B.  also  jijyiis-i-tfi  ( jiv  live),  dhiks-i-t4  (dah  burn),  susrus-i-t4 
(srii  hear). 

*  In  B.  also  lips-i-tavya  (labh  take),  didhyas-i-tavya  (dhya  think), 
jijnas-ya  (jiia  knou:). 


202  CONJUGATION  [172-173 

a.  The  primary  intensive  optionally  inserts  i  between  the 
root  and  terminations  beginning  with  consonants.  This  i 
is  found  in  the  1.  3.  s.  ind.  act.  and  the  2.  3.  s.  inipv.  and 
impf.  act.  ;  e.  g.  ind.  cakas-i-mi,  cakas-i-ti ;  impv.  2.  cakas- 
i-hi.     3.  j6hav-i-tu ;  impf.  3.  a-johav-i-t. 


Special  Rules  of  Reduplication. 

173.  1.  Eadical  i  and  u  are  reduplicated  with  the  respective 
Guna  vowels  e  and  o ;  e.  g.  dis  j^oitit :  de-dis  ;  nl  lead : 
ne-ni  ;  sue  shme  :  so-^ue  ;  nu  praise :  no-nu  ;  bhu  be : 
bo-bhu. 

2.  Eadical  a  and  f  are  reduplicated  in  two  ways : 

a.  More  than  a  dozen  roots  with  medial  a  (ending  in 
mutes  or  sibilants,  and  one  in  m)  as  well  'as  three  with 
final  r,  reduplicate  with  a :  kas  shine :  ca-kas ;  pat  fall : 
pa-pat ;  gam  go :  ja-gam  ;  gr  ivake :  ja-gr ;  dr  split :  da-dr  ; 
dhr  hold :  da-dhr  ;  also  cal  stir :  ca-cal. 

I).  All  other  roots  containing  r  (dr  and  dhr  also  alter- 
natively) and  those  with  medial  a  followed  by  r,  1,  or  a 
nasal,  reduplicate  with  ar,  al,  an  or  am ;  e.  g.  kr  com- 
memorate :  car-kr  and  car-kir ;  krs  drac/ :  car-krs ;  dr 
split :  dar-dr  and  dar-dir  (beside  da-dr) ;  dhr  hold :  dar-dhr 
(beside  da-dhr) ;  hrs  he  excited  :  jar-hrs  ;  car  move  :  car-car  ; 
phar  scatter :  par-phar  ;  cal  stir :  cal-cal  (beside  ca-cal) ; 
gam  go  :  jan-gam  (beside  ja-gam) ;  jambh  chew  up :  jan-jabh  ; 
dams  bite:  dan-das;  tan  thunder:  tam-stan  (66  A  2). 

3.  Over  twenty  roots  with  final  or  penultimate  nasal, 
r  or  u,  interpose  an  i  (or  i  if  the  vowel  would  be  long  by 
position)  between  the  reduplicative  syllable  and  the  root ; 
e.  g.  gam  go :  gan-i-gam  (but  gan-i-gm-at) ;  han  slai/ : 
ghan-i-ghan  ;  krand  erg  out :  kan-i-krand  and  kan-i-krad  ; 
skand  leap  :  kan-i-skand  and  can-i-skad ;  bhr  bear :  bhar- 
i-bhr ;  vrt  turn :  var-i-vrt ;  nu  jjm/.se  :  nav-i-nu ;  dhu  shaJce : 
dav-i-dliv ;  dyut  shine  :  dav-i-dyut. 


174]  INTENSIVES  203 

Irregularities. 

1/4.  The  radical  vowel  is  shortened  in  roots  with  medial  a  :  kaiS 
shine:  ea-kas  ;  badh  oppress  :  ba-badh ;  vaa  belloiv  :  va-vas.  In  a  few 
roots  containing  r  or  r  the  radical  syllable  varies  ;  thus  gr  swallow : 
jar-gur  and  jal-gul  ;  car  move  :  car-cur  beside  car-car;  tr  cross:  tar- 
tur  beside  tar-tar. 

rt.  The  root  r  go  reduplicates  with  al  :  al-ar  (dissimilation)  ;  gah 
ijlunge,  with  a  nasal:  jan-gah;^  badh  oppress,  with  its  final  mute:^ 
bad-badh  (beside  ba-badh)  ;  bhr  ^  hear  and  bhur  quiver,  with  a  palatal : 
jar-bhr,  jar-bhur  ;  bhur  and  gur  (jreef  reduplicate  u  with  a  :  jar-bhur, 
jar-gur. 

h.  Roots  with  initial  guttural,  if  interposing  i  before  the  root, 
reduplicate  with  the  same  guttural  ;  thus  krand  cry  out  :  kan-i-krand. ; 
gam  go  :  gan-i-gam  ;  han  (for  ghan)  slay  :  ghan-i-ghan  ;  kr  iiiakc  has 
both  kar-i-kr*  and  car-i-kr;*  skand  te'p  has  both  kan-i-skand  and 
can-i-skad. 

A.  The  forms  of  the  primary  type  that  occur,  if  made 
from  uij  tvash,  would  be  the  following  : 

1.  Pres.  ind.  act.  sing.  1.  n6nej-mi,  n6nej-i-mi.  2.  n6- 
nek-si.  3.  n6nek-ti,  n6nej-i-ti.  Du.  2.  nenik-thas.°  3.  ne- 
nik-tas.     PI.  1.  nenij-mas,  nenij-masi.     3.  n6nij-ati. 

Mid.  sing.  1.  nenij-6.  3.  nenik-t6.  Du.  3.  n6nij-ate, 
PI.  3.  nenij-ate. 

2.  Subj.  act.  sing,  1,  nenij-ani.-  2.  nenij-a-s.  3.  n^nij- 
a-t.     Du.  1.  n6nij-a-va.     PI.  1.  nenij-a-ma.     3.  n6nij-a-n. 

Mid.  du.  3.  nenij-aite.     PI.  3.  n6nij-a-nta. 


^  In  B.  also  jaii-jap-y^-te  (jap  mutter).  Here  also  vah  carry  re- 
duplicates with  n  (together  with  interposed  i)  though  there  is  no 
trace  of  a  nasal  in  the  root :  van-i-vah-yate. 

^  This  is  the  only  example  of  such  reduplication. 

3  This  root  shows  the  same  peculiarity  in  the  perfect  (139,  4). 

*  The  intensive  of  this  root  occurs  only  in  the  2iarticiple  karikr-dt 
and  carikr-^t. 

"  The  only  form  occurring  in  this  person  has  the  interposed  i  and 
strong  radical  syllable  :  tar-tar-i-thas. 

"  The  only  form  actiially  occuriing  in  this  person  is  janghto-ani 
(accented  like  the  subj.  of  the  reduplicating  present). 


204  CONJUGATION  [174 

3.  Opt.  No  certain  forms  occur  in  the  RV.  and  only  two 
active  forms  in  other  Samhitas:  sing.  3.  vevis-yat  (AV.), 
pi.  1.  ja-gr-yama  (VS.,  MS.,  TS.),  jagri-yama  (TS.).  The 
3.  s.  mid.  nenij-ita  occurs  in  K. 

4.  Impv.  About  twenty  active  (but  no  middle) '  forms 
occur.  Made  from  jagr  these  would  be :  sing.  2.  jagr-hi, 
jagar-i-hi,  jagr-tat.  3.  jagar-tu,  jagar-i-tu.  Du.  2.  jagr- 
tam.     3.  jagr-tam.     PI.  2.  jagr-ta.^ 

5.  Of  the  participle  over  forty  stems  occui',  about  two-thirds 
of  them  being  active.  Examples  are:  act.  kanikrad-at, 
eekit-at,  janghan-at,  jagr-at,  dardr-at,  nanad-at,  roruv- 
at ;  mid.  jarbhur-ana,  dandas-ana,  yoyiiv-ana  (yu  join), 
sarsr-ana. 

6.  Impf.  Fewer  than  thirty  forms  of  this  tense  occur, 
only  three  of  them  being  middle.  Examples  of  the  persons 
occurring  are : 

Act.  sing.  1.  a-cakas-am.  2.  a-jagar.  3.  a-dardar, 
a-var-i-var,  a-johav-i-t;  dav-i-dyot,  nav-i-no-t.  Du.  2. 
a-dardr-tam.  PI.  1.  marmrj-ma.  3.  a-carkrs-ur,  a- 
dardir-tir,  a-nonav-ur. 

Mid.  sing.  3.  a-dedis-ta,  a-nan-na-ta.^  PI.  3.  marmrj-ata. 

a.  Outside  the  present  system  few  intensive  forms  occur.  There 
are  four  act.  perfect  intensives  with  present  sense  :  sing.  1.  jagara. 
3.  jagar-a  {kypi'jyope),  davidhav-a  (dhu  shake),  n6nav-a(nui))'a?se);  also 
dodrav-a  '^dru  run  :  TS.),  yoyav-a  (yu  separate:  MS.),  lelay-a  (li  he 
unsteady  :  MS.).  There  is  besides  the  perf.  part,  jagr-vams.  A  causa- 
tive intensive  appears  once  in  the  participial  form  vai'-i-varj-ayant-i 
twisting  about* 


'  In  B.  occurs  the  2.  s.  mid.  form  nenik-sva  (-y/nij). 

2  The  RV.  has  no  impv.  forms  with  interposed  i,  but  the  AV.  and 
VS.  have  a  few  in  the  2.  3.  s.,  as  cakas-i-hi,  johav-i-tu.  A  few 
examples  occur  in  B.  also. 

*  From  nam  benri,  with  loss  of  nasal  (a  =  sonant  nasal),  for  ^-nan- 
nan-ta. 

*  In  B.  also  occur  the  causative  stems  from  intensives  jagar-aya 
and  dadhar-^ya  (dhr  hold). 


174-175]  INTENSIVES  205 

B.  The  forms  of  the  secondary  type,  which  is  indis- 
tinguishable from  a  passive  in  form,  number  only  about 
a  dozen.  They  occur  only  in  the  2.  3.  s.  and  3.  pi.  ind.  pres., 
besides  a  few  participles.     They  are  : 

Pres.  ind.  sing.  2.  co-sku-ya-se  (sku  tear).  3.  dedis- 
ya-te,  ne-ni-ya-te,  marmrj-ya-te,  rerih-ya-te,  vevij-yate, 
vevi-yate  (vi  enjoij).  PI.  3.  tartur-yante  (Vtv),  marmrj- 
yante. 

Part,  earcur-ya-mana  (\/car),  neni-ya-mana,  marmrj- 
ya-mana. 

IV.    Denominatives. 

175.  These  verbs,  inflected  like  those  of  the  a  conjugation 
(132),  are  derived,  almost  exclusively  with  the  suffix  ya, 
from  nouns,  to  which  they  express  some  such  relation  as 
'  be  or  act  like ', '  treat  as ',  *  turn  into ',  or  '  use  as ',  *  wish  for  '. 
More  than  a  hundred  denominative  stems  occur  in  the  RV. 
and  about  fifty  in  the  AV.^  The  suftix  is  normally  accented, 
but  a  certain  number  of  undoubted  denominatives,  such  as 
mantra-ya  utter  a  prayer,  artha-ya  make  an  object  of,  desire, 
have  the  causative  accent,  thus  forming  a  connecting  link 
between  the  regular  denominatives  and  the  causatives. 

A.  Before  the  suffix  ya  : 

1.  final  i  -  and  u  are  lengthened  ;  ^  e.  g.  kavi-ya  he  tvise 
(kavi),  rayi-ya  desire  wealth  (rayi) ;  rju-ya  he  straight 
(rju) ;  vasu-ya  desire  wealth  (vasu) ;  satru-ya  play  the 
enemy  (satru),  he  hostile. 

2.  final  a  usually  remains  unchanged,  but  is  often  length- 
ened ;    it  is  sometimes  changed  to  i ;   and  even  dropped  ; 


1  Denominatives  are  less  common  in  B.  ;  thus  the  AB.  has  hardly 
twenty,  and  the  SB.  about  a  dozen. 

*  Except  arati-yS  ud  like  an  enennj,  he  hostile  beside  arati-yd,  and 
jani-ya  seek  a  wife  beside  jani-ya  ;  gatu-ya  set  in  motion  (gatu). 

3  In  the  Pada  text  the  i  is  usually,  the  u  is  always,  written  short. 


206  CONJUGATION  [175 

e.  g.  jara-ya  treat  like  a  lover,  deva-ya  serve  the  gods,  rta-ya  ^ 
act  according  to  sacred  order ;  asva-ya  desire  horses,  rta-ya 
observe  sacred  order  (beside  rta-ya),  yajna-ya  sacrifice ; 
adhvari-ya  perform  the  sacrifice  (adhvara),  putri-ya  "^  desire 
a  son  (putra),  rathi-ya  -  drive  in  a  car  (ratha)  ;  adhvar-ya 
perform  sacrifice  (beside  adhvari-ya),  tavis-ya  le  mighty 
(tavisa  :  beside  tavisi-y a). 

3.  final  a  remains  unchanged  ;  e.  g.  gopa-ya  act  as  herdsman, 
ptrotect,  prtana-ya^  fight  Final  o,  in  the  only  example 
occurring,  becomes  av :  gav-ya  desire  cotvs. 

4.  Consonant  stems,  the  commonest  being  those  in  as, 
nearly  always  remain  unchanged;  e.g.  bhisaj-ya  jj?«^  the 
physician,  heal ;  uksan-ya  act  like  a  hull  (uksan) ;  vadhar-ya 
hurl  a  holt  (vadhar) ;  su-manas-ya  he  gracious  (su-manas) ; 
tarus-ya  engage  in  fight  (tarus). 

a.  A  few  denominative  forms  are  made  without  a  suffix,  direct 
from  nominal  stems,  but  nearly  always  beside  regular  denominatives 
in  ya. ;  e.  g.  bhisak-ti  from  bhisaj  act  as  pJiysicicm  beside  bhisaj-ya ; 
and  the  forms  taruse-ma,  tarusa-nte,  tarusa-nta  (fi'om  tarusa 
conqueror)  beside  tarus-ya. 

Inflexion. 

B.  All  the  tenses,  moods,  and  participles  of  the  present 
system  are  represented.  If  made  from  namas-ya  pug  homage 
the  forms  occurring  would  be  : 

1.  Pres.  ind.  act.  sing.  1.  namasyami.  2.  namasyasi. 
3.  namasyati.  Du.  2.  namasyathas.  3.  namasyatas. 
PI.  1.  namasya-masi,  -mas.  2.  namasyatha.  3.  namas- 
yanti. 

Mid.  sing.  1.  namasy^.     2.  namasyase.     3.  namasyate. 


^  With  causative  accent. 

2  The  Pada  text  in  this  and  nearly  every  example  has  i-ya.     Even 
the  Samhita  text  of  the  AV.  has  putri-yd. 

'  The  a  may  also  be  dropped  :  prtan-yay/(//ii  against. 


175]  DENOMINATIVES  207 

Du.  2.  namasy^the.  3.  namasy^te.  PL  1.  namasya- 
mahe.     3.  namasyante. 

2.  Subj.  act.  sing.  1.  namasya.  2.  namasyas.  3.  na- 
raasyat.     Du.  3.  namasyatas.     PI.  3.  namasyan. 

Mid.  sing.  2.  namasyase.     8.  namasyate. 

8.  Inj.  act.  sing.  2.  namasyas.     PI.  3.  namasyan. 

4.  Opt.  act.  sing.  2.  namasyas.  3.  namasy^t.  PI.  1. 
namasyema. 

Mid.  sing.  3.  namasy^ta. 

5.  Impv.  act.  sing.  2.  namasya.  3.  namasyatu.  Du.  2. 
namasyatam,  3.  namasyatam.  PI.  2.  namasyata.  3.  na- 
masyantu. 

Mid.  sing.  2.  namasyasva.  PI.  2.  namasyadhvam. 
3.  namasyantam. 

6.  Part.  act.  namasyant.     Mid.  namasyamana. 

7.  Impf.  act.  sing.  2.  anamasyas.  3.  anamasyat.  Du.  3. 
namasyatam.     PI.  3.  anamasyan. 

Mid.  sing.  3.  anamasyata.  Du.  2.  anamasyetham.  PI.  3. 
anamasyanta. 

a.  The  only  finite  forms  occurring  outside  the  present 
system  are  four  aorists.  Two  are  injunctives :  2.  s.  iinay-is 
(EV.)  from  unaya  leave  unfulfilled  (una) ;  2.  pi.  papay-is-ta 
(TS.)  from  papaya  lead  into  evil  (papa)  ;  and  two  indicatives : 
3.  s.  asaparyait  (AV.)  has  ivor shipped  (an  irregular  form, 
probably  =  a-sapary-it) ;  3.  pi.  a-vrsay-is-ata  (VS.)  tliey 
have  accep)ted}  The  TS.  has  also  the  three  fut.  participles 
kanduy-isyant  aJjout  to  scratch,  meghay-isyant  ahout  to  be 
cloudy,  sikay-isyant  -  ahout  to  drip,  with  the  corresponding 
perf.  pass.  part,  kanduyita,  meghita,  sikita.^ 


*  111  B.  also  occurs  the  is  aor.  asuyit  has  murmured. 
"  In  B.  also  occurs  the  future  gopay-isyati. 

^  In  B.  there  are  also  a  few  other  past  pass,  jjarticlples  and  a  few 
gerunds. 


CHAPTER   V 

INDECLINABLE   WORDS 

Prepositions. 

176.  Two  classes  of  prepositions  have  to  be  distinguished. 
The  first  comprises  the  genuine  or  adverbial  prepositions. 
These  are  words  with  a  local  sense  which,  primarily  used  to 
modify  the  meaning  of  verbs,  came  to  be  connected  inde- 
pendently with  the  cases  governed  by  the  verbs  thus 
modified.  They  show  no  signs  of  derivation  from  inflexional 
forms  or  (except  tiras  and  puras)  forms  made  with  adverbial 
suffixes.  The  second  class  has  been  called  adnominal 
prepositions  because  they  are  not  compounded  with  verbs, 
but  govern  cases  of  nouns  only.  They  almost  invariably 
end  in  case  terminations  or  adverbial  suffixes. 

1.   Adverbial  Prepositions. 

There  are  fourteen  or  (if  sam  is  included)  fifteen  genuine 
prepositions  which,  when  used  independently  of  verbs, 
define  the  local  meaning  of  cases.  They  are  almost  entirely 
restricted  to  employment  with  the  ace,  loc,  and  abl.  As 
their  connexion  with  the  abl.  is  only  secondary,  the  genuine 
prepositions  appear  to  have  been  originally  connected  with 
the  ace.  and  loc.  only.  As  a  rule  these  prepositions  follow, 
but  also  often  precede,  their  case. 

1.  The  accusative  is  exclusively  taken  by  acha  towards, 
ati  hei/ond,  anu  after,  abhi  towards,  prati  (Gk.  npoTL)  against, 
and  tiras  across  (cp.  Lat.  trans). 

a.  pari  (Gk.  -mpi)  around  takes  the  ace.  primarily,  but 
secondarily  and  more  frequently  the  abl.  in  the  sense  of 
from  {around). 


176-177]  PREPOSITIONS  209 

h.  xipa  fo  (with  verl)s  of  motion)  takes  the  aec.  primarily, 
and  less  frequently  the  loc.  in  the  sense  of  hesiile,  upon,  at. 

2.  The  locative  is  exclusively  taken  by  dpi  (Gk.  ^ttl)  upon 
and  primarily  by  adhi  upon,  antar  (Lat.  inter)  bettveen,  a  on, 
in,  at,  to,  puras  before. 

a.  adhi  takes  the  abl.  secondarily  and  less  commonly  in  the  sense 
o{/rom  {upon), 

h.  The  last  three  secondarily  take  both  abl.  and  ace. ;  purds  does 
so  without  change  of  meaning. 

antar  witli  abl.  nieans/>'o?rt  {loHliin) ;  with  ace,  behveen, 

a  with  ace.  means  to,  expressing  the  goal  with  verbs  of  motion. 
WiUi  the  abl.,  if  following,'  it  means/)-om  (on)  ;  if  preceding,  up  to.^ 

3.  The  ablative  seems  to  be  used  once  or  twice  indepen- 
dently with  ava  in  the  sense  of  clown  from. 

2.   Adnominal  Prepositions. 

177.  These  prepositions,  being  adverbs  in  origin,  govern 
oblique  cases  (except  the  dat.)  independently.  Several  of 
them  govern  the  genitive  and  the  instrumental,  cases  that 
are  practically  never  connected  with  the  genuine  prepositions 
in  the  Samhitas.  In  the  following  list  these  prepositions 
are  grouped  under  the  cases  which  they  accompany : 

1.  Ace. :  adhas  below  (also  with  abl.  or  gen.),  antara 
between,  abhi-tas  around,  upari  above,  hei/ond,  paras  beyond 
(also  with  abl.,  more  often  inst.),  pari-tas  around  (AV.), 
sanitur  apart  froni.^ 

2.  Instr. :  saha  ivith,  sakam  with,  sumad  tvitJi,  smad 
ivith  ;  avas  below  (also  abl.),  paras  outside  (also  ace.  and  abl.). 

3.  Abl. :  adhas  beloiv  (also  ace.  and  gen.),  avas  dotvnfrom 

'  It  sometimes  also  precedes  the  abl.  in  this  sense. 

2  This  is  almost  the  only  use  of  a  in  B. ;  in  C.  it  means  both /rom 
and  up  to. 

^  In  B.  several  adverbial  instrumentals  expressing  situation  or 
direction  govern  the  ace.  :  dntarena  between,  avarena  below,  parena 
beuond  ;  uttarena  fo  the  north  of,  ddksinena  to  the  south  of. 

1819  P 


210  INDECLINABLE   WORDS  [177-178 

(also  instr.),  q.x^  far  from  (also  gen.),  rt6  tvithout,  paras  a2)art 
from  (also  ace.  and  inst),  pura  before,  bahir-dlia  from  out, 
sanutar  far  from. 

4.  Gen. :  puras-tad  in  front  of^ 

5.  Loc. :  saca  {in  association)  with,  hesicle,  at,  in. 


Adverbial  Case-forms. 

178.  Many  case-forms  of  nominal  and  pronominal  stems, 
often  not  otherwise  in  use,  are  employed  as  adverbs. 
Examples  of  all  the  cases  appear  with  adverbial  function. 

1.  Nom. :  prathama-m  firstly,  dvitiya-m  secondly.  Such 
adverbs  were  originally  used  in  apposition  to  the  verbal 
action. 

2.  Ace. :  these  adverbs  find  their  explanation  in  various 
meanings  of  the  case.  They  represent  (a)  the  cognate  ace.  ; 
e.  g.  bhuyas  more,  and  comparatives  in  taram  added  to 
verbal  prefixes,  as  vi-taram  (kram)  {stride)  more  ivldely ; 
{h)  the  appositional  ace.  ;  e.  g.  nama  hy  name,  rupam  in  form, 
satyam  truly ;  (c)  the  ace.  of  direction ;  e.  g.  agram  (i)  {go) 
to  the  front  of,  before,  astam  (gam)  {go)  home ;  {d)  the  ace.  of 
distance  and  time  ;  e.  g.  duram  a  long  way  off,  far ;  naktam 
hy  nighi,  sayam  in  the  evening,  nityam  constantly,  purvam 
formerly. 

a.  There  are  also  sume  aec.  adverbs  derived  from  obsolete  nominal 
stems,  as  ara-m  sufficiently,  nii-nam  notv  ;  others  from  pronominal 
stems,  as  adas  the)-e,  i-dd.m  here,  now,  ki-m  idiy  ?,  yad  when. 

3.  Instr. :  adverbs  with  the  ending  of  this  case  (sometimes 
pi.)  are  formed  from  substantives,  adjectives,  and  pronouns. 
They  usually  express  manner  or  accompanying  circumstances, 
as  B2ih.a>s-di  forcibly,  navyas-a  anew,  ena  in  thisivay  ;  also  not 

^  In  B.  the  gen.  is  governed  by  this  adverb  as  well  as  by  paras-tad 
after;  e.  g.  suktasya  purastat  be/ore  the  hymn  ;  samvatsarasya  paras Lat 
after  a  year. 


178-179]  ADVERBS  211 

infrequently  extension  of  space  or  time,  as  agrena  in  front, 
aktii-bhis  hi/  night,  div-a  dtj  day. 

a.  The  substantive  instrumentals  are  chiefly  formed  from  feminines 
in  a  not  otherwise  used,  as  rtaya  in  the  right  waij,  naktaya  by  night. 

b.  The  adjective  instrumentals  are  formed  from  stems  in  a  and 
a  few  in  c  ;  e.g.  ucca  and  ucciis  on  high,  pasca  beltind,  madhya  in  the 
midst,  sanais  slowhj  ;  pvko-a.  forwards.  Tliere  are  also  several  anomalous 
fcaiinines  from  stems  in  u  and  one  or  two  in  i  ;  e.g.  asu-y-a  siviftlij, 
raghu-y-a  rapidUj,  sadhu-y-a  straight,  urviy-a/rtr. 

c.  The  pronominal  instrumentals  are  formed  from  stems  in  a  and 
one  in  u ;  e.  g.  ana  tints,  ama  at  home,  aya  thus,  kaya  how  ?,  ubhaya  in 
both  wags  ;  amu-y-a  in  tiiat  wag. 

4.  Dat. :  the  adverbial  use  of  the  dat.  is  rare :  aparaya 
for  the  future  (from  apara  later),  varaya  according  to  ivish 
(vara  choice). 

5.  Abl. :  these  adverbs  are  seldom  formed  from  substan- 
tives, as  arat  from  a  distance,  asat  from  near ;  or  from 
pronouns,  amat  from  near,  at  then,  tat  thus,  yat  as  far  as  ; 
but  they  are  fairly  often  formed  from  adjectives,  as  uttarat 
from  the  north,  dUrat  from  afar,  pascat  from  behind,  sanat 
from  of  old,  saksat  visihly. 

6.  Gen. :  such  adverbs  are  very  rare :  aktos  hg  night, 
vastos  in  the  morning. 

7.  Log.  :  agre  in  front,  astam-ik6  at  home,  ak6  near,  ar6 
afar,  rte  without,  dur6  afar;  aparisu  in  future. 


Adverbs  formed  with  Suffixes. 

179,  The  suffixes  more  or  less  commonly  used  in  the 
formation  of  adverbs  may  be  grouped  under  the  senses 
expressed  by  the  instr.,  abl.,  and  loc.  cases. 

1.  Instr. :  tha  forms  adverbs  of  manner  especially  from 
pronominal  stems :  a-tha  and  more  commonly  (with  short- 
ened vowel)  a-tha  then,  i-t-tha  thus,  ima-tha  in  this  manner, 
ka-tha  how  ?,  ta-tha  thus,  ya-tha  in  ivhich  manner,  anya-tha 
otherivise,   visva-tha   in  every  ivay ;    urdhva-tha  upwards, 

p2 


212  INDECLINABLE    WORDS  [179 

purva,-tha  formerly,  pratna-tha  as  of  old;  rtu-tha  regularly, 
nama-tha  h//  name ;  eva-tha  just  as. 

a.  tham  is  similarly  used  in  it-tham  thus  and  ka-th^m  Jwiv? 

dha  forms  adverbs  of  manner  from  numerals  or  cognate 
words :  eka-dha  singli/,  dvi-dha  in  tiro  ways,  kati-dha  how 
many  times,  puru-dha  variously,  bahu-dha  and  visva-dha 
in  many  ivays,  sasva-dha  again  and  again.  It  also  forms 
adverbs  from  a  few  nouns,  adverbs,  and  pronouns :  priya- 
dha  Jcindly,  mitra-dha  in  a  friendly  loay ;  bahir-dha  outward  ; 
a-dha  then,  a-d-dha  [thus  =)  truly.  The  same  suffix,  with 
its  vowel  shortened,  forms  sa-dha  {in  one  way  =)  together, 
which  appears  as  the  first  member  of  several  compounds, 
and  as  an  independent  word  assumes  the  form  of  saha  with. 

&.  Tlie  suffix  ha  probably  also  represents  original  dha  in  i-ha  liere 
(Praki'it  i-dha),  kii-ha  lohere?  visva-ha  and  visvd.-ha  aiica/js,  sama-ha 
in  some  way  or  other. 

va,  expressing  similarity  of  manner,  forms  the  two  adverbs 
i-va  like,  as,  and  e-va  (often  e-va)  thus,  vam  appears  in 
e-vam  thus,  the  later  form  of  eva. 

vat  forms  adverbs  meaning  like  from  substantives  and 
adjectives ;  e.  g.  manu-vat  like  Manu ;  purana-vat,  pur- 
va-vat,  pratna-vat  as  of  old. 

sas  forms  adverbs  of  manner  with  a  distributive  sense  : 
sata-sas  hy  hundreds,  sahasra-sas  hy  thousands,  sreni-sas  in 
rows  ;  rtu-sas  season  hy  season,  deva-sas  to  each  of  the  gods, 
parva-sas  joint  hy  joint,  manma-sas  each  as  he  is  minded. 

s  forms  two  or  three  multiplicative  adverbs  :  dvi-s  twice, 
tri-s  thrice.  It  also  appears  in  a  few  other  adverbs  :  adha-s 
helotv,  ava-s  doivmcards ;  dyu-s  (from  dyu  day)  in  anye- 
dyii-s  next  day  and  ubhaya-dyu-s  on  both  days. 

2.  Abl. :  tas  forms  adverbs  in  the  ablative  sense  from 
pronouns,  nouns,  and  prepositions  ;  e.  g.  a-tas  hence,  amu-tas 
thence,  i-tas  from  here,  mat-tas  from  me  ;  daksina-tas  from 
the  right,  hrt-tas  from  the  heart ;  abhi-tas  around,  pari-tas 


179-180]  ADVERBS  213 

round  about.  These  adverbs  are  sometimes  equivalent  to 
ablatives ;  e.  g.  ato  bhuyas  more  than  that. 

tat  (an  old  abl.  of  ta  that)  forms  adverbs  with  an  abl. 
sense  (sometimes  merging  into  the  loc.) ;  e.  g.  adhas-tat 
below ;  avat-tat  from  afar  ;  pasca-tat /rom  behind ;  puras-tat 
in  or  frotn  the  front ;  prak-tat  from  the  front. 

3.  Loc. :  as  forms  adverbs  chiefly  of  a  local  or  temporal 
sense  :  tir-as  across,  par-as  beyond,  pur-as  before ;  sa-div-as 
and  sa-dy-as  to-day,  sv-as  to-morrow,  hy-as  yesterday ;  also 
mith-as  wrongly. 

tra  or  tra  forms  adverbs  with  a  local  sense,  mostly  from 
pi-onominal  or  cognate  stems  :  a-tra  here,  anya-tra  elsewhere, 
visva-tra  everywhere ;  asma-tra  among  us,  sa-tra  in  one 
place,  daksina-tra  on  the  right,  puru-tra  in  many  places, 
bahu-tra  amongst  many ;  deva-tra  among  the  gods,  martya- 
tra  among  mortals,  sayu-tra  on  a  couch. 

a.  These  adverbs  are  sometimes  used  as  equivalents  of  locatives, 
6.  g.  hdsta  a  daksinatra  iri  the  right  hand. 

da  forms  adverbs  of  time  almost  exclusively  from  pro- 
nominal roots :  i-da  now,  ka-da  lohen  ?  ta-da  then,  ya-da  at 
ivhat  time,  sa-da  and  sarva-da  always. 

p.  dam  occurs  beside  da  in  sa-dam  always  ;  and  da-nim,  an  extended 
form  of  da,  in  i-da-nim  notv,  ta-da-nim  then,  visva-da-nim  always. 

y.  There  are  also  various  miscellaneous  adverbs,  mostly  of  obscure 
origin,  formed  with  other  suffixes  of  rare  occurrence  ;  e.  g.  pur-a 
before,  mith-u  wrongly. 

Conjunctive  and  Adverbial  Particles. 

180.  anga  emphasizes  a  preceding  word  (sometimes 
separated  from  it  by  short  particles  like  hi  and  im)  in  such 
a  way  as  to  express  that  the  action  especially  or  exclusively 
applies  to  that  word,  =just,  only,  else  ;  e.  g.  yo  anga  just  he 
who  ;  yad  ariga  just  ivhen,  just  because  ;  tvam  anga  thou  only ; 
kim  anga  lioiv  else,  why  else? 


214  INDECLINABLE   WORDS  [180 

a.  In  B.  ariga  never  has  this  meaning;  but  it  sometimes  there  begins 
a  sentence  with  an  adhortative  sense,  accentuating  the  verb  :  aiigl,  no 
yajia^m  vyac^ksva  pra?/  explain  the  sacrifice  to  ns  (MS.). 

atra  sometimes  occurs  as  the  correlative  to  yad  tvhcn  ; 
e.  g.  visve  yad  asyam  ranayanta  devah,  pra  vo  'tra  sum- 
nam  asyam  ivhen  all  the  gods  shall  rejoice  in  it,  then  may  I 
ohtain  your  favours. 

atha,  a  collateral  form  of  adha,  occurs  chiefly  in  the  more 
recent  hymns  of  the  EV.,  and  entirely  supplants  the  older 
doublet  in  the  later  Vedas.  Connecting  sentences  and 
clauses  it  expresses  a  temporal  or  logical  sequence.  It  may 
generally  be  translated  by  {and)  then,  (and)  so  ;  when  there 
is  a  contrast,  especially  after  a  negative,  it  is  equivalent  to 
but.  It  often  corresponds  to  a  yada  when  or  hi  since,  as,  in 
the  antecedent  clause.  With  very  few  exceptions  atha  begins 
the  sentence  or  clause.  Examples  are  :  mariidbhir,  indra, 
sakhyam  te  astu,  athema  visvah  prtana  jayasi  befriends 
with  the  Maruts,  0  Indra,  then  thou  shalt  win  all  these  battles 
(viii.  96") ;  huv6  vam,  atha  ma  (=  ma  a)  gatam  /  call  you, 
so  come  to  me  (viii.  10^) ;  yad^d  adevir  asahista  maya, 
athabhavat  kevalah  somo  asya  when  he  had  overcome  the 
godless  iviles.  Soma  became  exclusively  his  (vii.  98-) ;  makir 
nesan,  makim  risan,  makim  sam  sari  k6vate,  atharista- 
bhir  a  gahi  let  none  be  lost,  let  none  suffer  harm,  none  incur 
fracture  in  a  pit,  but  come  bach,  tvith  them  uninjured  (vi.  54"). 
From  B. :  patim  nu  me  punaryuvanam  kurutam,  atha 
vam  vaksyami  make  my  husband  young  again,  then  I  shall 
tell  you  (SB.) ;  aham  durg6  hanta^ity,  atha  kas  tvam  iti 
I  am  called  the  slayer  in  danger,  but  loho  are  you  ?  (TS.). 

a.  dtha  is  also  occasionally  used  after  gerunds  (which  are  equivalent 
to  an  antecedent  clause)  :  sdubhagyam  asyai  dattvaya^d,tha^_^fistam  vi 
pdretana  having  wished  her  luck,  tlten  go  home  (x.  85^^).  This  use  is 
common  in  B.,  where  it  also  occurs  after  present  participles  and 
locatives  absolute. 

h.  ^tha  in  the  sense  of  also  connects  substantives,  but  this  use 
represents   an   abridged   sentence  ;   e.g.   im6  somaso  ddhi  turvfifie. 


180]     CONJUNCTIVE  AND  ADVBL.  PARTICLES     215 

y^dau,  im.6  kanvesu  vam  d.tha  Uiese  Sonia^  are  heside  Turva.<a,  beside 
Yadu,  {tlietj  arc)  also  heside  the  Kanras  for  you  (viii.  9'^).  From  B.  :  idfim 
hi  pita^eva^agri  'tha  putro  'tha  pautrah/or  liere  first  comes  the  father,  then 
the  son,  then  the  grandson  (SB.). 

c.  In  B.  atha  also  connects  the  verbs  of  a  compound  relative  clause  : 
ydsya  pita  pitamahdh  punyah  syad,  atha  t^n  n^  prapnuyat  whose 
father  and  grandfather  are  inous,  but  ivho  cannot  attain  to  this  (TS.). 

atho  (=  atha  u)  generally  means  and  also,  moreover: 
arvavato  na  a  gahy  atho,  sakra,  paravatah  come  to  us  from 
near,  and  also,  0  mighty  one,  from  afar  (iii.  37").  From  B. : 
sam  inddha  a  nakh^bhyo  'tho  lomabhyah  he  kindles 
himself  completely  up  to  his  nails  and  also  his  hair  (SB.). 

a.  In  B.  atho  sometimes  has  the  sense  of  but  also,  e.g.  t6  vi,i  dv6 
bhavatah  .  .  .  atho  api  trini  syuh  there  are  two  of  them,  but  there  may  also 

he  three  (SB.). 

adha  occurs  in  the  EV.  only,  and  almost  exclusively,  as 
compared  with  atha,  in  the  earlier  hymns.  Like  the  latter 
it  means  then,  expressing  both  a  temporal  and  a  logical 
sequence  ;  when  there  is  a  contrast,  hut.  adha... adha  both... 
and ;  adha  dvita  and  that  particularly ;  adha  nii  just  noiv  ; 
now  at  last ;  and  even ;  adha  sma  especially  then.  Unlike 
atha  it  is  never  used  with  u. 

dpi  meaning  also,  even  generally  precedes  the  word  it 
emphasizes :  yo  gopa  api  tarn  huve  he  loho  is  the  herdsman, 
Mm  too  I  call  (x.  19^) ;  osadhir  bapsad  agnir  na  vayati, 
punar  yan  tarunir  api  Agni  tires  not  of  chewing  plants, 
returning  even  to  the  young  ones  (viii.  43"^).  From  B. :  tad 
dhaitad  apy  avidvamsa  ahuh  even  those  who  do  not  know 
say  this  (SB.) ;  adyapi  even  to-day  (AB.). 

aram  is  an  adverb  meaning  suitably,  in  readiness.  Some- 
times used  like  an  adjective,  it  is  construed  with  the  dative  ; 
e.  g.  tavan  ayam  patave  s6mo  astu,  aram  manase  yuva- 
bhyam  s^fc7i  let  this  Soma  he  {for  you)  to  drink,  according  to  (your) 
mind  for  you  two  (i.  108^);  sasmai^aram  it  is  ready  for  him. 
In  combination  with  kr  it  means  serve,  prepare  (anything) 


216  INDECLINABLE   WOEDS  [180 

for,  with  gam,  serve,  with  bhu,  accrue  (to  any  one)  suitaUi/  or 
sufficiently,  always  taking  the  dative. 

a.  dlara,  the  form  in  which  the  preceding  word  appears  in  B.,  is  there 
often  similarly  used  ;  e.  g.  sa  nllam  ahutya  asa  nalam  bhaksaya  it 
was  not  fit  for  offering,  nor  fit  for  consuming  (SB.). 

aha  in  the  KV.  and  AV.  emphasizes  a  preceding  M^ord 
whether  it  be  verb,  substantive,  pronoun,  adjective,  adverb, 
or  preposition.  Its  sense  may  generally  be  exj^ressed  by 
surely,  certainly,  indeed,  just,  or  merely  by  stress.  It  also 
appears  after  other  emphasizing  particles  such  as  id,  gh6d, 
ut6,  im.  Examples  of  its  use  are:  kvaha  ivhere  jpray? 
(x.  51^);  naha  not  at  all  (i.  147^) ;  yasyaha  sakrah  savan- 
esu  ranyati  in  the  pressings  of  wJiomsoever  the  mighty  one 
rejoices  (x.  43*^). 

In  B.  this  use  of  dha  is  still  found.  But  here  it  generally  occurs  in 
the  first  of  two  slightly  antithetical  sentences,  the  verb  of  the  first 
being  then  nearly  always  accented,  while  the  antithesis  in  the  second 
sentence  is  either  not  expressed  at  all,  or  is  indicated  by  the  particles 
fitha,  u,  or  tu ;  e.  g.  paracy  d,ha  dev6bhyo  yajndm  vdhaty  arvaci 
manusyan  avati  turned  away  it  takes  the  sacrifice  to  the  gods  ;  turned  hither 
it  advances  men  (SB.).  Sometimes  (in  MS.  and  TS.)  dha  is  thus  used 
with  the  first  of  two  va's  ;  e.  g.  kdsya  vahedam  svo  bhavita  kdsya  va 
this  ivill  to-morroio  belong  either  to  the  one  or  the  otJier  (MS.). 

a  (otherwise  a  preposition)  appears  in  V.  fairly  often 
emphasizing,  in  the  sense  of  completeness,  words  expressive 
of  number  or  degree,  or  sometimes  even  ordinary  adjectives 
and  substantives ;  e.  g.  trir  a  divah  three  times  each  day 
(i.  142  ■) ;  k6  vo  varsistha  a,  narah  ivho  is  the  very  mightiest 
of  you,  heroes?  (i.  37*');  pra  bodhaya  puramdhim  jara  a 
sasatim  iva  awake  the  wise  man,  just  as  a  lover  a  sleeping 
maiden  (i.  134^). 

ad  (originally  an  abl.  of  the  pronoun  a  =.from  or  after 
that)  is  used  as  an  adverb  expressing  sequence  of  time  = 
thereupon,  then,  often  as  a  correlative  to  yad,  yada  or  yadi 
when,  sometimes  to  the  relative  when  equivalent  to  those 
conjunctions:  yad^d  ayukta  haritah  sadhasthad  ad  ratri 


180]     CONJUNCTIVE  AND  ADVBL.  PAKTICLES    217 

vasas  tanute  as  soon  as  he  has  yoked  his  steeds  from  their  stall, 
then  night  spreads  her  garment  (i.  115"^);  adha  yo  visva 
bhiivanabhy  avardhata,  ad  rodasi  jy6tisa  vahnir  atanot 
now  {who  =)  'When  he  surpassed  all  beings,  then  the  charioteer 
overspread  the  tivo  worlds  with  light  (ii.  17*). 

a.  It  sometimes  connects  words  and  clauses  in  the  sense  of  and, 
moreover  :  asau  ca  ya  na  urvd.ra^ad  imam  tanvam  md.ma  that  field  of  ours 
and  this  mij  body  (viii.  91®) ;  yad,  indra,  dhan  prathamajam  ahinam,  an 
mayinara.  dmiuah  prot^  m.ayah  when,,  0  Indra,  thou  didst  slay  the  firstborn 
of  t fie  serpents  and  thai  didst  bring  to  nought  the  tviles  of  the  wily  (i.  32*). 

b.  It  is  sometimes  used  with  interrogatives,  when  it  means  then, 
pray  :  kim  ad  ^matrara  sakhyam  Iiow  mighty  then  is  the  friendship  ? 
(iv.  23"). 

c.  Unless  used  with  interrogatives,  ad  almost  invariably  begins 
the  Pada. 

d.  ad  is  often  followed  by  id,  when  it  means  just  then,  then  at  once, 
then  more  than  ever. 

iti  thus  is  used  with  verbs  of  speaking  and  thinking, 
which  have  sometimes  to  be  supplied.  The  particle  generally 
concludes  the  speech  and  is  followed  by  the  verb :  ya  indra  ya 
sunavama^iti^aha  tvho  sags  '  ive  tvill  press  Soma  for  Indra ' 
(iv.  25*) ;  n6ndro  asti^iti  n6ma  u  tva  aha  *  Indra  does  not 
exist '  one  and  another  sags  (viii.  100').  Less  commonly  the 
verb  precedes:  jyestha  aha  camasa  dva  kara^iti  the  eldest 
said  '  I  ivlll  make  two  cups '  (iv.  33'').  Very  rarely  both  iti  and 
the  verb  precede  the  speech:  vi  prchad  iti  mataram,  ka 
ugrah  he  asked  his  mother,  '  who  are  the  strong  ones? '  (viii.  77^). 
The  verb  is  occasionally  omitted :  tvasta  duhitr6  vahatum 
krnoti^iti^idam  visvam  bhuvanam  sam  eti  ^  Tvastr prepares 
a  ivedding  for  his  daughter'  (thinking)  thus  this  tvhole  world 
comes  together  (x.  17^).  Thus  a  principal  sentence  as  direct 
speech  is  used  with  iti  where  in  other  languages  a  subordinate 
sentence  would  be  employed. 

1.  In  B.  the  use  of  iti  is  much  the  same,  only  that  iti  regularly  follows 
and  seems  seldom  to  be  omitted ;  the  verbs  of  saying  and  thinking, 
too,  with  which  it  is  employed,  are  more  numerous  :  t6.tha^iti  deva 
abruvau  'j/es',  said  the  gods  (SB.). 


218  INDECLINABLE   WOEDS  [180 

2.  There  are  in  B.  also  some  additional  uses  : 

a.  Very  often  the  quotation  is  only  an  appellative  that  may  be 
expressed  by  inverted  commas :  yams  tv  etad  deva  aditya  iti^a-c^ksate 
wJiom  they  call  thus:  'the  divine  Adifyas'  (SB.). 

6.  Sometimes  iti  is  used  at  the  end  of  an  enumeration  to  express 
that  it  forms  a  well-known  aggregate  :  etad  vai  sirah.  samrddham 
yasmin  prano  vak  caksuh.  srotram  iti  fhat  is  a  complete  head  in  nhich 
are  breath,  sijeech,  eije,  ear  (KB.). 

c.  The  particle  is  also  often  used  in  a  special  sense  with  reference 
to  a  ritual  act  to  indicate  how  it  is  done  :  iti^£gre  krsati^dtha(_,iti,_; 
dtha  iti^dtha^iti(_^atha^iti  (SB.)  so  he  first  draivs  theftirroxo,  then  so,  then 
so,  then  so,  then  so  {=  as  you  see). 

d.  Sometimes  a  conjunction  is  introduced  before  the  quotation 
that  ends  with  iti,  but  without  changing  the  construction :  s4  rt4ra 
abravid  yatha  s^rvasv  evd.  samavad  vasani^iti  (MS.)  he  sivore  {that) 
'  I  will  dwell  with  all  equally^  (=  that  he  icoidd). 

.  ittha  primarily  means  so :  ganta  nunam  .  .  yatha  pura^ 
ittha  as  Ijcfore,  so  come  ye  noiv  (i.  39") ;  satyam  ittha  truly  so 
(viii.  33"^').  Secondarily  it  comes  to  mean  (just  so  as  it 
should  be=)  truly:  krnoti^asmai varivo  ya ittha^indraya 
somam  usat6  sunoti  lie  (Indra)  gives  ease  to  him  that  truly 
presses  Soma  for  Indra  who  desires  it  (iv.  24'').  In  this  sense 
the  word  is  sometimes  used  like  an  adjective :  ittha  sakhi- 
bhyah/o>"  (those  who  are  truly  =)  true  friends  (iii.  '^2'^^). 

id  (n.  of  the  pron.  stem  i,  Lat.  i-d)  is  a  very  common 
particle  in  the  RV.,  is  much  less  frequent  in  the  AV.,  and 
is  comparatively  rare  in  B.^  It  emphasizes  preceding  words 
of  all  kinds,  including  the  finite  verb  (which  it  accents),  and 
may  usually  be  rendered  by  just  or  stress  only,  sometimes 
by  even ;  e.  g.  tad  in  naktam  tad  id  diva  mahyam  ahuh 
this  is  what  they  tell  me  by  night,  this  hy  day  (i.  24^-) ;  syama 
id  indrasya  sarmani  may  we  he  in  Indra's  care  (i.  4^) ;  adha 
sma  no  maghavan  carkrtad  it  then  especially  thinJc  of  us, 
0  Bounteous  One  (i.  104'^) ;  sadrsir  adya  sadfsir  id  u  svah 
alilce  to-day,  alike  even  to-morrow  (i.  123'^).     When  the  verb  is 

1  In  classical  Sanskrit  id  survives  only  in  the  compound  particle 
ced  //=  ca-id. 


180]     CONJUNCTIVE  AND  ADVBL.  PARTICLES     219 

compound,   the  particle  regularly  follows  the  preposition, 

not  the  verb  itself:   ulukhala-sutanam  ava^id  v,  indra, 

jalgulah  gul2)  eagerly  doivn,  0  Ii/dra,   llie  drops  shed  by  the 

mortar  (i.  28^). 

a.  In  B.  the  particle  is  similarly  used  :  n^  ta  it  sadyo  'ny^smai  dti 
diset  he  should  noi  assign  {just  those  =)  the  same  {cows)  to  another  on  the 
same  da>f  (SB.)  ;  tatha^in  nundm  td.d  asa  now  thus  it  came  to  pass  (SB.). 

iva  is  an  enclitic  particle  with  two  uses  : 

1.  It  means  as  if,  as,  lilic  in  abbreviated  similes  in  appo- 
sition, never  introducing  a  clause  like  yatha.  It  follows 
the  word  with  which  comparison  is  made  ;  if  the  comparison 
consists  of  several  words,  the  particle  generally  follows  the 
first,  less  commonly  the  second.  The  comparison  is  usually 
complete,  but  not  infrequently  it  is  only  partially  expressed. 
This  employment  of  iva  is  very  common  in  V.,  but  com- 
paratively rare  in  B.  Examples  of  this  use  are :  dur6  cit 
san  talid  ivati  rocase  even  though  far  away,  thou  shinest 
brightly  as  if  near  at  hand  (i.  94^) ;  tat  padam  pasyanti 
diviva  caksur  atatam  they  see  that  step  like  an  eye  fixed  in 
heaven  (i.  22-°) ;  sa  nah  pita^iva  sunave  agne  supayano 
bhava  as  such  be  accessible  to  us,  0  Agid,  as  a  father  to  his  son 
(i.  l^j ;  dviso  no  ati  nava^iva  paraya  taJce  its  across  our  foes 
as  [across  the  ocean]  in  a  ship  (i.  97') ;  tabhi  rajanam 
parigrhya  tisthati  samudra  iva  bhumim  with  these  he  keeps 
embracing  the  king,  as  the  sea  the  earth  (AB.). 

2.  It  modifies  a  statement  not  intended  to  be  understood 
in  its  strict  sense,  meaning  as  it  were.  It  chiefly  follows 
adjectives,  adverbs,  prepositions  or  verbs.  This  use  of  iva  is 
rare  in  V.,  but  very  common  in  B.  Examples  are  :  iha^_,iva 
srnve  I  hear  close  at  hand  as  it  were  (i.  37") ;  tad,  indra, 
pra^iva  viryam  cakartha  that  heroic  deed,  0  Indra,  thou  didst 
perforin  [asittvere=)  quite  pre-eminently  (i.  103') ;  yapra^iva 
nasyasi  who  [as  it  were=)  almost  losest  thyself  (i.  146^); 
yadi  tan  na^iva  haryatha  if  ye  are  not  quite  pleased  ivith  that 
(i.  161^).    From  B. :  tasmat  sa  babhruka  iva  hence  he  {is  as 


220  INDECLINABLE   WORDS  [180 

it  tvere=)  may  he  called  hrown  (SB.)  ;  rebhati^iva  he  seems  to 
chatter  (AB.) ;  tan  na  sarva  iva^abhipra  padyeta  not  exactly 
every  one  should  have  access  to  that  (SB.) ;  upari,_^iva  vai  tad 
yad  urdhvam  nabheh  above  may  he  called  what  is  higher  than 
the  navel  (SB.). 

im  (an  old  enclitic  ace.  of  the  pron.  root  i)  occurs  in  V. 
only,  and  is  almost  restricted  to  the  RV. 

1.  It  is  generally  employed  as  an  ace.  sing,  of  all  genders 
=  him,  her,  it,  sometimes  even  as  an  ace.  du.  or  pi.  It  either 
takes  the  place  of  a  noun,  or  prepares  for  a  following  noun, 
or  is  accompanied  by  other  pronouns  (tarn,  yam,  enam, 
enan) ;  e.  g.  a  gachanti^im  avasa  they  come  to  him  with  aid 
(i.  85^^) ;  a^im  asiim  asave  bhara  hring  him,  the  swift,  to  the 
swift  (i.  4") ;  tam  im  hinvanti  dhitayah  him  devotions  impel 
(i.  144^) ;  yad  im  enan  usato  abhy  avarsit  (vii.  103^) 
when  it  has  rained  upon  them  that  longed  (for  rain). 

2.  im  also  appears  as  a  generalizing  particle  with  relatives 
(ivhoever),  with  yad  {whenever),  with  interrogatives  [ivho, 
pray  ?),  with  kim  cana  [nothing  at  all) ;  e.  g.  yd  im  bhavanti 
ajayah  tvJiatever  conflicts  take  place  (vii.  32^'^) ;  ka  im  vyakta 
narah  ivho,  pray,  are  the  radiant  men?  (vii.  56^). 

u  is  an  enclitic  particle,  often  written  u  where  the  metre 
requires  or  favours  a  long  syllable,  especially  in  the  second 
syllable  of  a  Pada,  before  a  single  consonant.  It  often 
appears  contracted  to  o  (ep.  24)  with  a  preceding  a  or  a 
(mostly  the  final  of  particles  or  prepositions,  also  of  the 
pron.  esa,  sometimes  of  verbal  forms).  It  has  two  main 
uses  in  the  RV. : 

1.  It  is  employed  deictieally  with  verbs  and  pronouns. 

a.  With  verbs  it  expresses  the  immediate  commencement 
of  an  action :  with  a  present  =  now,  already ;  with  a  past 
tense  =JMs^;  with  an  imperative,  injunctive,  or  optative 
used  in  an  impv.  sense  =  at  once ;  sii  is  here  very  often 
added,  u  su  being  =  instantly.  When  the  verb  is  accom- 
panied by  a  preposition,  the  particle  regularly  follows  the 


ISO]     CONJUNCTIVE  AND  ADVBL.  PARTICLES     221 

latter.  Examples  of  its  use  are  :  lid  u  tyam  jatavedasam 
devam  vahanti  ketavah  Ms  beams  note  hear  aloft  the  god  that 
knows  all  creatures  (i.  50^) ;  abhud  ii  bhah  the  light  has  just 
arisen  (i.  46^°) ;  tapa^u   sv    agne  antaran   amitran   hum 

instantly,  0  Agni,  our  neighhourlng  foes  (iii.  18^). 

a.  This  use  of  u  with  verbal  forms  does  not  seem  to  be  found  in  B. 

h.  It  emphasizes  deictic  pronouns,  which  may  then  be 
rendered  by  stress,  and  interrogative  pronouns,  when  it  may 
be  translated  by  pray ;  e.  g.  ayam  u  te,  sarasvati,  vasistho 
dvarav  rtasya  subhage  vy  avah  this  Vasisfha  has  opened 
for  thee,  0  hountiful  Sarasvati,  the  tivo  doors  of  sacrifice  (vii.  95*') ; 
ka  u  sravat  ivho,  xoray,  ivill  hear  ?  (iv.  43^). 

a.  In  B.  this  use  is  very  rare  with  deictic  ijronouns,  but  not 
infrequent  with  interrogatives ;  e.  g.  idam  u  no  bhavisyati  yadi  no 
jesyd,nti  this  at  least  loill  remain  to  us,  if  they  conquer  us  (TS. )  ;  kim  u  sa 
yajnena  yajeta  yd  gam  iva  yajiadm  n^  duhita  iohat  sort  of  sacrifice, 
pray,  would  he  offer  if  he  were  not  to  milk  out  the  sacrifice  like  a  cow  ?  (MS.). 

2,  The  particle  u  is  used  anaphorically  to  connect  sen- 
tences, when  a  word  (usually  the  first)  is  repeated  in  the 
second,  in  the  sense  of  also  ;  e.  g.  trir  naktam  yathas,  trir 
u,  asvina,  diva  thrice  hy  night  ye  come,  thrice  also,  0  Asvins, 
hy  clay  (i.  34'^) ;  tvam  trata  tvam  u  no  vrdh^  bhuh  thoic  he 
our  protector,  thou,  too,  he  for  our  increase  (i.  178^).  The 
repeated  word  need  not  always  have  the  same  form  :  yo  no 
dv6sty  adharah.  sas  padista,  yam  u  dvismas  tam  u  prand 
jahatu  may  he  ivho  hates  us  fall  downward;  ivhom  also  loe  hate, 
him  too  let  his  breath  forsake  (iii.  SS^i).  The  u  sometimes 
appears  in  both  sentences,  sometimes  in  the  first  only: 
vayam  u  tva  diva  sut6,  vayam  naktam  havamahe  tve 
call  thee  hy  day  to  the  pressed  Soma,  tve  also  hy  night  (viii.  64''). 

a.  It  is  sometimes  used  without  referring  back  definitely, 
but  simply  adding  some  similar  quality  or  activity  with 
reference  to  the  same  thing  =  and  also,  and ;  e.  g.  sa  devo 
devan  prati  paprathe  prthu,  visv6d  u  ta  paribhur  brah- 
manas  pdtih  he,  the  god,  has  extended  himself  tvidely  to  the  gods, 
and  he,  Lord  ofVrayer,  embraces  all  this  universe  (ii.  24^^). 


222  INDECLINABLE   WORDS  [iso 

h.  It  also,  in  the  same  sentence,  expresses  a  contrast  =  on 
the  contrary,  or,  more  frequently,  with  the  demonstrative  ta 
corresponding  to  the  relative  ya  =  again,  in  return ;  e.  g. 
striyah  satis  tan  u  me  pumsa  ahuli  tJiose  who  are  women, 
them  on  the  contrarti  they  speak  of  to  me  (as)  men  (i.  1Q4}^') ; 
yd  adhvar^su  h6ta  . .  tam  u  namobhir  a  krnudhvam  him 
ivho  is xiriest  at  sacrifices,  in  return  bring  hither  with  devotions 
(i.  772). 

a.  In  B.  the  anaphoric  use  is  common,  prevailing  chiefly  in  the 
SB.  ;  e.g.  t^smad  va  indro  'bibhet,  tasmad  u  tvastabibhet  of  thai 
Indra  ivas  afraid,  of  that  also  Tvastr  loas  afraid  (MS.). 

a.  The  demonstrative  here  often  refers  back  with  u  to  previous 
statements  :  uto  pancavattam  ev^  bhavati  :  pankto  yajnah,  panktah 
pasuh,  paiicartavah  samvatsarasya  :  esa^u  paiacavattasya  sampat  : 
hut  it  is  also  divided  into  five  parts  :  the  sacrifice  is  fivefold,  cattle  are  fivefold, 
the  seasons  of  the  year  are  five  :  this  is  the  sum  of  what  is  divided  into  five 
parts  (SB.).  Similarly  used  are  the  phrases  tdd  u  ha  smaha  with 
reference  to  this  he  used  to  say,  tad  u  hovaca  with  reference  to  this  he  said  ; 
tad  u  tatha  n^  kuryat  that  one  should  not  do  thus. 

0.  A  slight  contrast  is  expressed  by  ii  in  the  second  sentence  : 
yadi  nasnati  pitrdevatyo  bhavati,  yady  v  asnati  devan  aty  asnati 
if  he  does  not  eat,  he  becomes  a  tvorshipper  of  tJte  Manes,  but  if  he  does  eat,  he 
eats  before  the  gods  (SB.). 

7.  Used  in  combination  with  kim,  u  expresses  a  climax  in  the 
second  clause  =  how  mucli  more  :  manusya  in  nva  upastirnam  ichanti, 
kim  u  deva  yesam  navavasanam  even  men  ivish  for  something  spread  out, 
how  muclt  more  the  gods  whose  is  a  neio  dwelling  (TS.). 

uta  in  the  RV.  means  and,  connecting  two  or  more  words 
or  sentences. 

a.  The  particle  commonly  couples  two  words  ;  e.  g.  yah  .  . 
prthivim  uta  dyam  6ko  dadhara  who  alone  has  siifiported 
heaven  and  earth  (i.  154^).  When  there  is  an  enumeration 
of  more  than  two  objects,  uta  comes  after  the  last ;  e.  g. 
adite,  mitra,  varuna^uta  0  Aditi,  Mitra,  and  Vannia 
(ii.  27^*).  When  a  word  is  repeated  from  the  beginning  of 
a  clause,  uta  (like  u)  follows  the  repeated  word :  trih  sau- 
bhagatvam  trir  u.ta  sravamsi  nah  thrice  (grant)  us  prosjjerity 
and  thrice  fame  (i.  34^). 


180]     CONJUNCTIVE  AND  ADVBL.  PAETICLES     223 

I).  When  uta  connects  a  sentence  with  a  preceding  one,  it 
is  placed  at  the  beginning  :  et^nagne  brahmana  vavrdhas- 
va  .  .  uta  pra  nesy  abhi  vasyo  asman  tvith  this  xirayer, 
0  Ac/ni,  strengthen  thyself,  and  lead  us  onward  to  greater 
fortune  (i.  SV"^). 

c.  uta. ..uta  means  both. ..and;  uta  va  or;  uta  va...uta 

va  either... or;   e.  g.  uta^idanim  bhagavantah  syama^^uta 

prapitva  uta  madhye  ahnam  both  notv  may  we  be  fortunate 

and  at  eventide  and  at  midday  (i.  41'^) ;  samudrad  uta  va 

divas  pari  from  the  ocean  or  from  heaven  (i.  il*') ;  ya  apo 

divya  uta  va  sravanti  khanitrmah  either  the  waters  that  are 

celestial  or  that  Jioiv  in.  channels  (i.  49-). 

a.  In  B.  uta  does  not  mean  and,  but  also,  even,  emphasizing  the 
assertion  generally  and  not  (like  api)  a  single  notion  in  the  sentence  : 
uta  yddi^_^ita,sur  bhavati  jivaty  ev^  ecen  when  his  breath  is  gone,  he  still 
lives  (TS.).  Even  when  preceding  a  substantive  ut^  seems  to  refer  to 
the  whole  statement  :  uta  matsya  eva  matsyam  gilati  it  is  also  tlie  case 
that  one  fish  devours  another  (SB.). 

0.  With  the  025tative  utfi  exjiresses  that  an  action  might  after  all 
take  place  :  uta^^evsun  cid  devan  abhi  bhavema  after  all  we  might  thus 
overcome  the  gods  (SB.). 

h.  utd...uta  in  B.  (as  well  as  in  V.)  means  both... and:  ut^  rtava 
uta  pasava  iti  bruyat  lie  slwuld  say  '  hoih  fite  seasons  and  tlie  animals '  (SB.). 

7.  uta  is  i-egularly  the  first  word  in  the  sentence  except  that  kim 
or  forms  of  ta  or  ya  precede  it :  tasmad  uta  bahur  apasur  bhavati 
flierefore  ecen  fhougli  rich  lie  bcconies  caftleless  (SB.). 

uto  (=  uta  u)  in  the  RV.  means  and  also:  uto  no  asya 

usaso  jus6ta  hi  and  may  he  also  be  pleased  tvith  us  this 

morning  (i.  131*'). 

a.  In  13.  uto  has  the  sense  of  but  also  or  also  :  ahavaniye  havimsi 
srapayeyuh  .  .  .  uto  garhapatya  eva  srapayanti  lliey  slioidd  cook  tlie 
oblation  on  tlie  Ahavcmlija  fin;  hut  they  also  cook  it  on  the  Garhapatya  (SB.). 

eva  has  two  uses  in  the  RV.  and  the  AV. : 

1.  At  the  beginning  of  sentences  or  clauses  it  means  thus, 
referring  either  to  what  precedes  or  follows ;  e.  g.  evagnir 
gotamebhir  astosta  thus  Agni  has  been  praised  by  the 
Gotamas  (i.  77^) ;  eva  tarn  ahur :  indi'a  6ko  vibhakta 
thus  they  speak  of  him  :  '  Indra  is  the  one  dispenser '  (vii.  26"^). 


224  INDECLINABLE  WORDS  [180 

It  often  appears  as  the  con-elative  of  yatha  as :  yatha  na 
purvam  aparo  jdhaty,  eva,  dhatar,  ayumsi  kalpayaisam 
as  the  later  abandons  not  the  earlier,  so,  Creator,  arrange  their 
lives  (x.  18').  With  the  impv.  eva  =  so,  then  :  eva  vandasva 
varunam  brhantam  (viii.  42-)  then  praise  the  lofty  Varuna 
(who  has  done  these  great  deeds). 

2.  As  an  emphasizing  particle  following  the  word  on 
which  stress  is  laid,  eva  may  be  variously  rendered  just, 
quite,  alone,  &c.,  or  by  stress  ;  e.  g.  tarn  eva  him  only ; 
6ka  eva  quite  alone  ;  atraiva  just  here  ;  svayam  eva  quite 
spontaneously,  jata  eva  scarcely  horn,  na^^eva  not  at  all. 

a.  In  B.  the  first  of  the  above  uses  has  entirely  clisapi;)eared  (evdm 
here  taking  the  place  of  ev^),  while  the  second  is  extremely  common. 
The  particle  follows  all  kinds  of  words  requiring  emphasis  for  any 
reason;  this  is  especially  the  case  when  a  word  is  repeated  ;  e.g. 
yd,m  Sgre  'gnim  hotraya  pravrnata,  s£  pradhanvad,  y5.m  dvitiyam 
pravrnata,  sa  prfi^_^eva^adhanvat  ihe  Agni  ivJiom  they  first  chose  for  the 
priesthood,  perished ;  he  ichom  they  chose  the  second  time,  likewise  jjerished 
(SB.).  When  two  notions  are  connected  by  w.iy  of  contrast  or  other- 
wise, evd,  may  follow  either  the  first  or  the  second ;  e.  g.  amum  evd, 
deva  upayan,  imam  d,surah  (SB.)  the  gods  inherited  that  world  (heaven), 
the  Asuras  this  one  (the  earth) ;  somo  yusmakam,  vag  evasmakam  (let) 
Soma  (be)  yours,  Vac  ours  (^B.). 

evam  thus  occurs  only  once  in  the  RV.  (as  correlative  to 
yatha  as)  and  in  the  AV.  not  at  all  with  yatha,  but  only  as 
an  adverb  with  the  verb  vid  Jcnow :  ya  evam  vidyat  he  ivho 
may  possess  such  hnoivledge. 

In  B.  evam  is  veiy  common,  having  two  uses  : 

1.  It  is  correlative  to  y^tha  as,  being  often  accompanied  by  a  form 
of  the  same  verb  as  the  latter  ;  e.  g.  ydtha  vdi  parjdnyah  siivrstim 
vdrsaty,  evd.ni  yajiio  ydjamanaya  varsati  as  Parjanya  rains  heavily,  so 
the  sacrifice  rains  for  the  sacrificer  (TS.).  When  the  second  verb  is 
omitted,  ydtha. . .evd,m  is  equivalent  to  iva ;  e.g.  t€  deva  abby 
asrjyanta  y^tha  vittim  vetsyfimana  evdm  the  gods  rushed  up  like  those 
wishing  to  oHain  piropertg  (SB.). 

2.  It  accompanies  verbs  as  an  .ndverb,  especially  in  the  very 
frequent  phrase  yd,  evdm  v6da  he  who  possesses  such  knowledge ;  utfi^ 
evdm  cin  ua  labheran  after  all  they  ivill  thus  not  touch  it  (SB.). 


]80]     CONJUNCTIVE  AND  ADVBL.  PARTICLES     225 

kam  appears  l)oth  as  an  accented  and  an  unaccented 
particle.  The  foriner  use  is  found  in  both  V.  and  B..  the 
latter  in  the  KV.  only. 

1.  a.  kam  as  an  adv.  with  the  full  meaning  well  (equivalent 
to  the  Vedic  sam)  appears  in  B.  only  ;  e.  g.  kam  me  'sat 
may  it  he  well  with  me  (SB.);  it  also  occurs  in  a  negative 
form  :  a-kam  bhavati  he  fares  not  well  (TS.). 

b.  kam  has  the  same  meaning  attenuated  after  datives 
(generally  at  the  end  of  a  Pada)  either  of  persons  =  j^r  i/«e 
henejit  of  (dat.  commodi)  or  of  abstract  nouns  (final  dative) ; 
e.  g.  yuvam  etam  eakrathiil;i  sindhusu  plavam  taugryaya 
kam  i/e  two  hare  placed  that  shiji  in  the  waters  for  the  benefit  of 
the  son  of  Tiujra  (i.  182'") ;  tvam  devaso  amrtaya  kam 
papuh  thee  the  r/ods  hare  drunl;  for  the  love  of  immortalitji 
(ix.  106^^) ;  samanam  anjy  anjate  siibh6  kam  (vii.  57'^)  witli 
the  same  hue  theij  adorn  themselves  in  order  to  shine  {well). 
From  B. :  kasmai  kam  agnihotram  hiiyata  iti  for  whose 
benefit  is  the  Agnihotra  offered?  (MS.) ;  tdjase  kani  purnama 
ijyate  for  the  saJce  of  splendour  the  fill  moon  sacrifice  is 
offered  (MS.). 

2.  The  unaccented  kam  occurs  in  the  RV.  only  excepting 
one  independent  passage  of  the  AV.  It  always  appears  as 
an  enclitic  following  the  particles  nu,  su,  hi.  It  means 
wiUinghj,  gladly,  indeed,  but  the  sense  is  generally  so  attenu- 
ated as  to  be  untranslatable,  nu  kam  appears  with  the  inj., 
impv.,  subj.,  ind.,  also  in  relative  clauses  ;  e.g.  aso  nu  kam 
ajaro  vardhas  ca  be  imaging  and  grow  (x.  50'').  su  kam 
appears  with  the  imperative  only  :  tistha  su  kam,  magha- 
van,  ma  para  gah  praji  stand  still,  bounteous  god,  go  not 
further  (iii.  532).  Yd  kam  generally  appears  with  the  ind. 
(occasionally  omitted),  sometimes  with  impv.  or  subj.  : 
raja  hi  kam  bhuvananam  abhisrih  /br  ho  indeed  is  the  king 
who  rules  over  beings  (i.  98^). 

kim  (n.  of  ki  =  ka)  has  two  uses.     In  the  first  place  it 
means  ivhy  ?  e.  g.  kim  u  sr^sthah  kim  yavistho  na  ajagan 


226  INDECLINABLE  WORDS  [180 

why  has  the  best,  ivhij  has  the  youngest  come  to  us  ?  (i.  161^). 
It  is  also  a  simple  interrogative  particle  (equivalent  to  a 
mark  of  interrogation) ;  e.  g.  kim  me  havyam  ahrnano 
juseta  tvotild  he,  free  from  anger,  enjoy  an  ohlatlon  of  mine  ? 
(vii.  86^) ;  kim  rajasa  ena  paro  any  ad  asti  is  there  anything 
else  beyond  the  ivcUiin?  (AV.  v.  ll'^). 

a.  In  B.  kim  is  similarly  used.  With  following  u  it  here  adds 
a  climax  in  a  second  sentence  =  hoio  much  more  (see  u)  ;  with  following 
ut^  and  the  optative  it  means  ivluj  after  all  ;  e.  g.  kim  utd  tvareran 
why,  after  all,  sho^(ld  they  hasten?  (6B.). 

kila,  an  uncommon  particle  in  V.,  meaning  indeed, 
certainly,  strongly  emphasizes  (in  EV.  and  AV.)  the  preceding 
word  (noun,  pronoun,  adjective,  and  the  negative  na) ;  e.  g. 
svadiis  kila^ayam  (vi.  47^)  sweet,  indeed,  is  this  (Soma) ; 
tadttna  satrum  na  kila  vivitse  then  thou  didst  find  no  foe  at 
all  (i.  32*). 

a.  In  B.  the  use  is  similar;  e.g.  ksipriim  kila^a  strnuta  (6b.) 
quickly,  then,  sjjread  (the  barhis).  But  here  kila  usually  follows  other 
particles,  v&i  or  (ha)  vavd, :  esa  v&i  kila  haviso  yamah  this,  indeed,  is 
the  course  of  the  sacrifice  (6b.)  ;  tava  ha  vava  kila  bhagava  idam  Sir, 
this  belongs  to  you  only  (AB.\ 

kuvid,  a  pronominal  interrogative  particle,  introduces 
sentences  which,  though  apparently  independent,  are  treated 
as  dependent,  since  the  verb  (except  twice  in  the  RV.)  is 
regularly  accented.  This  use  seems  to  have  arisen  from  the 
particle's  liaving  been  employed  as  an  elliptical  expression  of 
doubt  such  as  might  be  rendered  by  '  I  wonder  (whether) " ; 
e.  g.  tdm,  indra,  madam  a  gahi  kuvin  nv  asya  trpnavah 
come,  Indra,  to  this  carouse  (to  see)  whether  you  shall  enjoy  it 
(iii.  42^) ;  kuvit  somasya  apam  iti  have  I,  indeed,  drunk 
Soma  (x.  119^)  =  (I  wonder)  whether  I  have  drunk  Soma. 

a.  In  B.  kuvfd  is  similarly  used  ;  e.  g.  kuvin  me  putrfim  dvadhit 
fias  lie  actually  killed  my  son  ?  (SB.) :  kuvit  tuanim  aste  does  he  indeed  sit 
silent?  (6b.). 


ISO]     CONJUNCTIVE  AND  ADVBL.  PARTICLES     227 

khalu  indeed,  in  truth,  does  not  occur  at  all  in  the  AV.. 
and  only  once  in  the  RV.,  where  it  emphasizes  an  imperative : 
mitram  krnudhvam  khalu  pray,  conclude  friendship  (x.  34^*). 

a.  In  B.  the  particle  is  common.  It  is  rarely  used  alone,  but  often 
with  other  particles. 

a.  It  appears  alone  with  the  impv.,  subj.,  or  ind.  ;  e.g.  dtra  khdlu 
ramata  here,  pray,  remain  (f^B.)  ;  rdhn^vat  khdlu  sd.  yo  raaddevatyam 
agnim  add.dliatai  he  indeed  shall  prosper  who  shall  establish  a  fire  conse- 
crated to  me(TS.);  asmakdra  evd^idfim  kh^lu  bhuvanam  to  us  alone 
indeed  this  loorld  belongs  (SB.). 

b.  After  the  particles  u  or  i,tho  and  before  or  after  v^i,  it  emphasizes 
the  word  preceding  the  combined  particles;  e.g.  t£d  u  khdlu  maha- 
yajio  bhavati  thus,  indeed,  the  great  sacrifice  arises  (6b.). 

a.  fitho  khd,lu  is  used  either  to  express  an  (usually  preferred) 
alternative  =  or  else,  or  rather,  but  sjirehj  rather ;  or  to  introduce  an 
objection  ;  e.  g.  vaisvadevdm  iti  bruyad,  dtho  khfilu  aindr^m  fti 
bruyat  'for  all  gods'  one  should  say,  or  else  one  should  say  'for  Indra' 
(TS.);  diksitena  satyam  eva  vaditavyam ;  atho  khalv  ahuh :  ko 
'rhati  manusyah  sarvam  satyam  vaditum  iti  an  initiated  man  should 
speak  the  truth  only  ;  noiv  they  make  the  objection :  '  what  man  can  speak  the 
ichole  truth?'  (AB.). 

^.  vdi  kh^lu  can  only  be  distinguished  from  vdi  alone  as  an 
emphatic  vi,i.  But  kh&lu  v&i  in  the  TS.  and  AB,  has  the  special  use 
of  introducing  a  second  causal  protasis  after  a  first  beginning  with 
simple  vdi,  the  conclusion  then  following  with  evd ;  e.g.  prajapaty6 
v&i  purusah ;  prajapatih  kh&lu  v&i  td.sya  veda :  prajapatim  evi, 
avina,  bhagadhey^na  upa  dhavati  now  mayi  comes  from  Prajapati ;  again 
Prajapati  knows  about  him  :  so  he  approaches  Prajapati  icith  the  portion  (of 
the  sacrifice)  belonging  to  him  (TS.).  This  use  occasionally  occurs  even 
though  the  preceding  clause  does  not  begin  with  vfii. 

gha  is  an  enclitic  particle,  almost  restricted  to  the  RV. 
Generally  occupying  the  second  place  in  the  Pada,  it  is  with 
few  exceptions  metrically  lengthened  to  gha.  It  emphasizes 
the  preceding  word,  which  is  nearly  always  either  the 
negative  nd,  or  a  pronoun  (demonstrative  or  personal),  or  a 
verbal  preposition,  the  meaning  being  variously  rendered  by 
just,  onJif,  very,  or  merely  stress.  It  emphasizes  a  noun  only 
twice  and  a  verb  only  once  in  the  RV. :  trtiye  gha  savane 
at  least  at  the  third  Soma  libation  (i.  16P) ;  usanti  gha  t^ 
amrtasa  etat  those  immortals  desire  this  (x.  10'*). 


w2 


228  INDECLINABLE   WORDS  [180 

ca  (Gk.  re,  Lai.  -que)  and  is  an  enclitic  conjunction  used 
to  connect  both  words  and  sentences.  It  regularly  follows 
an  accented  word,  and  when  it  adds  a  clause,  the  first  word 
of  that  clause. 

1.  ca  connects  substantives  (including  pronouns  and 
numerals)  and  adverbs ;  e.  g.  mitram  huve  varunam  ca 
I  invoice  Mitra  and  Varuna  (i.  2') ;  maghavano  vayam  ca 
the  patrons  and  ive  (i.  73^) ;  satam  6kam  ca  a  hundred  and 
one  (i.  117^^) ;  adya  nunam  ca  to-day  and  now  (i.  13^). 
In  a  few  passages  (but  never  in  B.)  the  ca  follows  the  first 
word  instead  of  the  second :  nakta  ca  .  .  usasa  niffht  and 
morning  (i.  73''). 

a.  ca...ca  are  used  mucli  in  the  same  way;  e.g.  girdyas  ea  dyava 
ca  bhuma  the  mountains  and  heaven-and-earth  (i.  61^*)  ;  divds  ca  gm&s 
ca  of  heaven  and  of  earth  (i.  37^) ;  asman  ca  tarns  ca  us  and  fliem  (ii.  1"^)  ; 
n^va  ca  navatira  ca  nine  and  ninetij  (i.  32'*) ;  a  ca  para  ca  carantam 
moving  hither  and  away  (i.  164^'). 

Similarly  in  B.  :  devas  ca(_;asuras  ca  gods  and  Asxras  (SB.)  ;  sastfs 
ca  trmi  ca  satani  sixty  and  three  hundred  ;  purastac  cai__^updristac  ca 
from  before  and  from  behind. 

j3.  ca...ca  sometimes  also  express  a  contrast  :  ndkta  ca  cakrur  usd,sa 
virupe  :  krsnd.m  ca  v^rnam  arund,m  ca  s^m  dhuh  they  have  made 
night  and  morning  of  different  aspect :  they  have  imt  together  the  black  colour 
and  the  ruddy  (i.  73''). 

Similai'Iy  in  B.  :  ubhdyam  gramydm  ca^_^aranydm  ca  juhoti  he 
sacrifices  loth  :  what  is  fame  and  mhat  is  ivihl  (MS.). 

a.  A  peculiar  use  of  ca  in  the  RV.  is  to  add  a  second 
vocative  in  the  form  of  a  nominative ;  e.  g.  vayav  indras 
ca  .  .  a  yatam  0  Vayu  and  Indra,  come  (i.  2*^). 

h.  Another  peculiar  use  of  ca,  both  in  V.  and  B.,  is  to 
add  one  noun  (nearlj^^  always  in  the  nom.)  to  another  which 
has  to  be  supplied  ;  e.  g.  a  yad  indras  ca  dadvahe  when  we 
two,  (I)  and  Indra,  receive  (viii.  34^^) ;  indras  ca  somam 
pibatam,  brhaspate  do  ye,  (thou),  0  Brhaspati,  and  Indra. 
drink  (iv.  50^'>). 

From  B. :  ta  brhaspatis  ca^anvavaitam  they  two,  (he)  and 
Brhaapati,  followed  them  (TS.) ;  tat  samjnarn  krsnajiuaya  ca 


180]     CONJUNCTIVE  AND  ADVBL.  PARTICLES     229 

vadati  so  he  pronounces  harmoni/  (between  it)  and  the  black 
antelope  skin  (SB.). 

o.  In  B.  ca  is  used  to  add  a  siiiglt;  word  at  the  end  of  a  sentence  in 
the  sense  of  and  {so  did)  ;  e.  g.  sr^mena  ha  sma  vdi  tdd  deva  jayanti 
y^d  esam  jfiyyam  asa^fsayas  ca  hy  penance  the  gods  were  wont  to  loin  what 
ivas  to  be  won  by  them,  and  so  did  the  seers  (SB. ). 

c.  ca  following  tlie  interrogative  ka,  or  the  relative  ya 
und  the  interrogative  ka  combined,  gives  them  an  indefinite 
sense:  kas  ca  or  yah  kas  ca  any  one,  whoever  (cp.  119  h). 

2.  ca  also  connects  both  principal  sentences  and  relative 
clauses :  a  devdbhir  yahi  yaksi  ca  come  with  the  gods  and 
sacrifice  (i.  14^) ;  ya  vyusur  yas  ca  nunam  vyuchan  that 
have  shone  forth  and  that  shall  now  shine  forth  (i.  113^"); 
yd  'sman  dvesti  yam  ca  vayam  dvismah  who  hates  us  and 
whom  we  hate  (SB.). 

a.  ca...ca  connect  sentences  to  express  a  contrast  by 
means  of  parallel  verbal  forms  which  are  either  identical  or 
at  least  appear  in  the  same  number  and  person,  the  first 
verb  being  then  always  accented :  para  ca  yanti  punar  a 
ca  yanti  they  yo  away  and  come  again  (i.  123^''^). 

a.  In  B.  the  use  of  ca...ca  is  simihar  ;  e.  g.  vatsd.m  ca^upavasrjAty 
ukham  caj^^adhi  srayati  he  admits  ih'e  calf  and  puts  the  pot  on  the  fire  (TS.). 
Tlie  rule  of  accentuation  api>lies  even  when  tire  second  verb  is 
omitted  :  agnaye  ca  havih  paridddati  guptya  asyai  ca  prthivydi 
he  delivers  the  oblation  for  protection  to  Fire  and  lo  this  Earth  (SB.).  This 
connecting  use  is  particularly  common  in  parallel  abridged  relative 
sentences  :  sSrvan  pasun  ni  dadhire  ye  ca  gramya  ye  ca^_,aranyah 
they  laid  down  all  animals,  those  that  are  tame  and  tliose  that  are  wild  (SB.). 

3.  ca  is  used  a  few  times  in  V.  in  the  sense  of  if  with,  the 
subjunctive  or  the  indicative:  indras  ca  mrlayati  no,  na 
nah  pascad  agham  nasat  if  Indra  he  gracious  to  us,  no 
calamity  will  hereafter  befall  us  (ii.  41^\);  imam  ca  vacam 
pratiharyatha,  naro,  visv^d  vama  vo  asnavat  if  ye 
graciously  accept  this  song,  0  heroes,  it  will  obtain  all  goods 
from  you  (i.  40^). 

cana,  properly  meaning  not  even,  is  most  usually  employed 


230  INDECLINABLE   WORDS  [180 

after  a  negative  ;  e.  g.  trtiyam  asya  nakir  a  dadharsati, 
vayas  cana  patayantah  patatrinah  no  one  dares  approach 
his  third  (step),  not  even  the  winged  birds  though  they  fly 
(i.  155*).  From  its  use  in  such  supplementary  clauses, 
where  it  may  also  be  translated  by  even,  the  latter  sense 
comes  to  be  the  natural  or  even  necessary  one  after  a  negative 
in  a  single  clause  sentence  ;  e.  g.  yasmad  rt6  na  sidhyati 
yajn6  vipascitas  cana  without  whom  the  sacrifice  does  not 
succeed  [not]  even  of  the  ivise  man  (i.  18") ;  indram  na  mahna 
prthivi  cana  prati  even  the  earth  is  not  equal  to  Indra  in 
greatness  (i.  81*).  As  one  of  the  two  negatives  is  superfluous 
in  a  single  clause  sentence,  cana  alone  occasionally  does 
duty  for  the  negative :  mah6  cana  tvam  para  sulkaya 
deyam  not  even  for  a  great  reward  would  I  give  thee  away 
(viii.  1*). 

a.  In  a  few  passages,  even  when  there  is  no  accompanying 
negative,  cana  throwing  off  its  own  negative  sense,  means 
even,  cdso :  aham  cana  tat  suribhir  anasyam  I  too  would 
acquire  this  with  the  patrons  (vi.  26") ;  adha  cana  srdd 
dadhati  therefore  cdso  they  believe  (i.  55*). 

a.  Ill  B.  cana  appears  only  after  a  negative  in  single  clause 
sentences,  in  which  n&  cana  means  not  even  ;  e.  g.  na  hainani  sapdtnas 
tvistiirsamanas  cand  strnute  no  enemij  fells  him  even  U/ough  desirunj  io  fell 
hv,n    8B.\ 

li.  cana  gives  the  interrogative  an  indefinite  sense  :  kas 
cana  any  one,  na  kas  cana  no  one  (cp.  119  b). 

cid  is  an  enclitic  particle  very  frequently  used  to  emphasize 
the  preceding  word.     It  has  two  senses: 

1.  expressing  that  the  statement  is  not  to  be  expected 
in  regard  to  the  word  emphasized  :  even  ;  e.  g.  a  drdham  cid 
arujo  gavyam  urvam  even  the  firm  eoivstall  thou  hast  broken 
through  (iii.  32^'^).  This  sense  is,  however,  sometimes  so 
attenuated  as  to  be  capable  of  being  rendered  by  stress  only  ; 
e.  g.  tvam  cin  nah  samyai  bodhi  svadhih  be  thou  attentive 
to  our  endeavour  (iv.  S*). 


180]     CONJUNCTIVE  AND  ADVBL.  PAETICLES     231 

2.  generalizing  =  any,  every,  all ;  e.  g.  krtam  cid  6nah 
pra  mumugdhy  asmat  (i.  24^)  remove  from  us  any  (every, 
all)  sin  committed  (by  us).  Similarly,  with  interrogatives  = 
any,  with  relatives  =  ever ;  thus  kas  cid  any  one :  srn6ti  kas 
cid  esam  any  one  {=  every  one)  hears  them  (i.  37^-^) ;  sun- 
vadbhyo  randhaya  karn  cid  avratam  subject  every  impious 
man  to  those  that  'press  Soma  (i.  132-*);  na  or  ma  kas  cid  [not 
any  =)  no  one  ;  kada  cid  ever  =  at  any  time  or  always;  yas 
cid  tvhoever ;  y ac  cid  if  ever ;  yatha  cid  as  ever. 

a.  In  B.  the  only  use  that  survives  is  the  generalizing  sense  with 
interrogative  pronouns  =  any,  some  ;  e.  g.  fitha  kam  cid  aha  then  he 
satjs  to  some  one  (SB.)  ;  yfit  te  kds  cid  Abravit  tchal  any  one  said  to 
you  (SB.). 

c6d  (=  ca  id)  if  occurs  only  three  times  in  the  KV.,  but 
later  becomes  commoner.  In  the  RV.  and  AV.  it  is  found 
with  the  ind.  pres.  and  aor.  ;  in  the  AV.  it  also  occurs  once 
with  the  opt.  Thus  :  vi  c^d  uchanty,  asvina,  usasah,  pra 
vam  brahmani  karavo  bharante  ivhen  the  Baivns  shine  forth, 
0  AsviiiS,  the  singers  offer  prayers  to  you  (vii.  72'^) ;  brahma 
ced  dhastam  agrahit  sa  eva  patir  ekadha  if  a  Brahman 
has  taJcen  her  hand,  he  alone  is  her  husband  (AV.  v.  17*)  ;  iti 
manvita  yacitah  vasam  c6d  enam  yaceyuh  thus  one  ivould 
thinlc,  who  has  been  requested,  if  they  were  to  request  a  cow  of 
him  (AV.  xii.  4.-^% 

a.  In  B.  c6d  is  used  with  the  ind.  pres.,  aor.,  fut.  and  with  the  opt.  ; 
f.  g.  dtas  c6d  evi,  nditi  nasya  yajno  vyathate  if  he  does  not  go  away 
from  tJiere,  his  sacrifice  does  not  fail  (MS.) ;  sa  hovaca  turiyam-turiyam 
cen  mam  abibhajams  turiyam  ev^  tarhi  vaii  niruktam  vadisyatiti 
he  said  '  if  they  have  given  me  only  one-fourth  each  time,  then  Vac  will  speak 
distinctly  only  to  the  extent  of  one-fourth '  (SB.) ;  td,m  c6n  me  nd  vivdksyasi, 
murdha  te  vi  patisyati  if  you  cannot  explain  this  (riddle)  to  me,  your  head 
will  burst  (SB.) ;  et^m  ced  anydsma  anubruyas  tdta  eva  te  ^fras 
chindyam  if  you  were  to  tell  this  to  another,  I  would  strike  off  your  head  (SB.). 

tatas  occurs  in  the  EV.  several  times  adverbially  in  the 
local  sense  of  the  ablative  =  thence ;  e.  g.  tato  visam  pra 
vavyte  tlience  the  poison  has  turned  away.     It  also,  but  very 


232  INDECLINABLE   WORDS  [180 

rarely,  has  the  temporal  sense  of  thereupon,  then ;  e.  g. 
yajnair  atharva  prathamah  pathas  tate,  tatah  suryo  .  . 
ajani  tvith  sacrifices  Athar van  first  extended  the  paths,  then  the 
sun  was  horn  (i.  83'^). 

a.  In  B.,  on  the  otherhand,the  temporal  sense  oithereupon  is  extremely 
common.  Here  it  also  often  appears  at  the  beginning  of  a  sentence 
connected  with  a  preceding  one  in  the  sense  of  therefore,  consequently  ; 
e.  g.  sa  yaja^m  ev&,  yajnapatrani  pra  vivesa;  tdto  hainamnd,  iiekatur 
nf rhantum  it  entered  into  the  sacrifice  i(se%  into  the  sacrificial  vessels ; 
consequently  those  tivo  ivere  unable  to  expel  it  (SB.). 

tatha  occurs  in  the  RV.  in  the  sense  of  so,  thus ;  e.  g. 
tatha  rtuh  such  is  the  rule  (i.  83^'').  It  also  appears  as  a 
correlative  (though  less  often  than  eva)  to  yatha ;  e.  g. 
syavasvasya  sunvatas  tatha  srnu  yathasrnor  atreh  listen 
to  the  sacrificing  SyCwaha  as  thou  didst  listen  to  Atri  (viii.  36''^). 

a.  In  B.  the  use  is  similar  ;  e.  g.  tdtha^i'n  niinfi,m  tad  asa  so,  indeed, 
it  came  to  ^Jass  (SB.) ;  as  correlative  (though  less  often  than  evam)  to 
yfitha :  nd  vdi  t^tha^_^abhud  ydtha^amamsi  it  has  not  come  about  as  I  had 
thought  (f^B.). 

h.  t^tho  ( =  tdtha^u)  occurs  in  B.,  meaning  and  in  the  same  way,  but 
so  ;  e.  g.  tdtho  evottare  ni  vapet  and  in.  the  same  icay  he  should  assign 
the  last  two  TS.  :  sa  yad  daksina-pravana  syat,  ksipre  ha  yd.jamano 
'mum  lokam  iyat,  tdtho  ha  yajamauo  jyog  jivati  ////  (the  altar)  iverc 
sloping  to  the  soutli,  the  sacrificer  would  quicldij  go  to  i/ondi'r  irarld,  but  thus 
(as  it  is)  the  sacrificer  lives  a  long  time  (SB.). 

tad  is  often  used  adverbially  in  the  RV.  It  then  has  three 
different  senses : 

1.  It  frequently  means  tlicn  as  correlative  to  yad  when ; 
e.  g.  yaj  jayatha  vrtrahatyaya  tat  prthivim  aprathayali 
when  thou  wast  horn  for  the  Vrtra-fight,  tlwu  didst  spread  out 
the  earth  (viii.  89'^). 

2.  It  is  also  often  used  in  the  sense  of  thither  (ace.  of  the 
goal) ;  e.  g.  tad  it  tva  yukta  harayo  vahantu  thither  let  the 
yoked  haps  ivaft  thee  (iii.  53'^). 

3.  Occasionally  it  has  the  sense  of  therefore ;  e.  g.  tad  vo 
deva  abruvan,  tad  va  aganiam  that  tlic  gods  said  to  i/ott, 


180]     CONJUNCTIVE  AND  ADVBL.  PARTICLES     233 

therefore  I  Mve  come  to  you  (i.  161-) ;  pra  tad  visnuh  stavate 
viry^na  therefore  Visuu  is  praised  for  his  heroism  (i.  154^). 

a.  In  B.  tdd-has  four  different  adverbial  uses  : 

1.  as  a  correlative  to  ydd  (when,  inasinucli.  as)  =  thereby,  and  to 
ydtra  (ivhere)  =  there  ;  e.  g.  ydn  nv  evd,  rajauani  abhisunvtoti,  tit  t&m 
ghnanti  now  ivhen  they  press  the  king  (soma),  they  kill  him  thereby  (SB.)  ; 
ydtranya  6sadhayo  mlayanti  tad  et^  modamana  vardhante  ivherc 
other  plants  wither,  it  (the  wheat)  grows  merrily  (SB.). 

2.  in  the  sense  of  thereupon,  then  ;  e.  g.  athaj^itithim  s^mam  tdd 
aughi  aganta,  tan  ma  navara  upakalpya^upasasai  now  in  such  and 
such  a  year  a  Jlood  will  then  come,  then  having  built  a  ship  you  shall  turn 
to  me  (SB.). 

3.  constantly  with  reference  to  a  preceding  statement  in  the  sense 
of  as  to  that,  thereby,  thus ;  e.  g.  yajnSm  ev^  tdd  deva  vipayan  the  gods 
thus  obtained  the  sacrifice  (SB.)  ;  tdt  tad  avaklptdm  ev^  y^d  brahmano 
'rajanyah  syat  so  it  is  quite  suitable  that  a  Brahman  should  be  toithout 
a  king  (SB.)  ;  tad  ahuh  ccs  to  that  they  say ;  t5.d  u  tdt  noio  as  to  this  (SB.). 

4.  before  yad  with  reference  to  a  preceding  statement  to  add  an 
explanation,  and  may  be  rendered  by  that  is  to  say,  now ;  e.  g.  t&d 
ydd  esi,  etdt  tapati  tena  esa  sukrah  now,  inasmuch  as  he  hums  here, 
therefore  he  is  bright  (^SB.).  Similarly  in  the  phrase  tdd  yat  tdtha  titat  is 
to  say,  ivhy  it  is  so  (is  as  follows)  =  the  reason  for  this  is  as  follows  (SB.). 

tarhi  at  that  time,  then,  occurs  only  once  in  the  RV.,  but 
several  times  in  the  AV.  :  na  mrtyur  asid  amrtam  na 
tarhi  there  tvas  not  death  nor  immortalitjj  then  (x.  129^).  In 
the  AV.  the  word  appears  as  correlative  to  yada  iohen,  and 
in  B.  to  yati'a,  yad,  yada,  yarhi  trhen,  and  yadi  if;  e.  g. 
raksamsi  va  enam  tarhy  a  labhante  yarhi  na  jayate  the 
Eahmses  then  seize  him  when  (the  fire)  does  not  arise  (AB.) : 
yadi  va  rtvijo  'loka  bhavanty  aloka  u  tarhi  yajamanah 
if  the  priest  is  tvithout  a  place,  the  sacrificer  is  then  also  without 
a  place  (SB.). 

tasmad  therefore  is  not  found  as  an  adverb  in  the  RV., 
but  occurs  several  times  as  such  in  the  AV.,  and  is  constantly 
so  used  in  B.  As  correlative  to  yad  hecause  it  appears  once 
in  the  AV.  and  is  very  common  in  B. ;  e.  g.  yad  vai  tad 
varunagrhitabhyah  kam  abhavat  tasmat  kaydh  (MS.) 
hecause  those  who  were  seized  hi/  Varuna  felt  well,  therefore  it  is 
called  Ml/a  {hod//). 


234  INDECLINABLE   WORDS  [i8o 

tii,  though  accented,  never  commences  a  sentence  or  Pada. 
It  has  two  uses : 

1.  It  is  an  emphasizing  particle.  In  the  RV.,  where  it 
occurs  nearly  fifty  times,  it  seems  to  be  restricted  to  this 
sense. 

a.  In  about  two-thirds  of  its  occurrences  tu  emphasizes 
an  exhortation  in  the  2.  pers.  impv.  (rarely  the  3.  pers.,  or 
the  subj.  in  an  impv.  sense)  =  pray,  then]  e.g.  a  tv  6ta,  ni 
sidata  jjm^  come,  sit  you  down  (i.  5^) ;  na  te  dur6  parama 
cid  rajamsy,  a  tu  pra  yahi  haribhyam  eve)i  the  highest 
spaces  are  not  far  to  thee ;  come  hither,  then,  tvith  thy  two  hays 
(iii.  302). 

h.  In  several  passages  tu  emphasizes  assertions  (generally 
following  the  demonstrative  ta)  in  the  sense  oi  surely,  indeed  ; 
e.  g.  tat  tv  asya  that  surely  is  his  tvorJc  (iii.  30^-). 

2.  It  is  an  adversative  i^article  meaning  hut.  This  is  its 
sense  in  the  only  passage  of  the  AV.  in  which  it  occurs,  and 
is  its  only  meaning  in  B. ;  e.g.  cakara  bhadram  asmabhyam 
atmane  tapanam  tu  sah  he  has  done  what  is  good  for  lis,  hut 
painful  to  himself  (AV.  iv.  IS*') ;  tad  evam  v6ditor  na  tv 
evam  kartavai  that  one  shoidd  hioiv  thus,  hut  not  do  thus  (MS.). 
With  aha  or  nu  in  the  preceding  clause,  it  expresses  the 
sense  it  is  true... hut;  e.g.  tad  aha  t^sam  vaco,  'nya  tv 
evatah  sthitih  this  indeed  is  what  they  say,  hut  the  estahlished 
practice  is  different  therefrom  (SB.). 

tena  occurs  in  B.  as  au  adverb  correlative  to  y^d  because;  e.g.  yfid 
gramyasya  nd^dsnati  tena  gramyan  dva  runddhe  because  he  does  not 
eat  any  fame  animal,  therefore  he  gains  tame  animals  for  himself  (MS.). 

tvava  (compounded  of  tu  vavi),  a  particle  sometimes  occurring 
in  B.,  does  not  perceptibly  differ  in  sense  from  vav&  (q.  v.);  e.g. 
trdyo  ha  tvavd  pasfivo  'medhyah  there  are  just  three  kinds  of  animals 
unfit  for  sacrifice  (6B.). 

tv^i  (compounded  of  tu  vdi)  is  sometimes  found  in  B.  meaning 
but  indeed. 

dvita,  a  particle  occurring  about  thirty  times,  is  restricted 
to  the  RV.     There  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  is  an  old  instru- 


180]     CONJUNCTIVE  AND  ADVBL.  PARTICLES     235 

mental,  etymologically  meaning  doubly.  This  sense  taken 
either  literally  =  In  tivo  ivays,  or  figuratively  =  emphatically, 
especially,  more  than  ever,  seems  to  suit  all  the  passages  in 
which  the  word  occui's  ;  e.  g.  bharadvaj  aya^a va  dhuksata 
dvita  dhenum  ca  visvadohasam  isam  ca  visvabhojasam 
on  Bharadvdja  do  ye  (Maruts)  milk  doivn  doubly,  both  the 
all-milking  cow  and  all-nourishinij  food  (vi.  48^^) ;  raja  devanam 
uta  martyanam  dvita  bhuvad  rayipati  rayinam  as  king  of 
gods  and  mortals  may  he  be  doubly  lord  of  riches  (ix.  97^*) ; 
dvita  yo  vrtrahantamo  vida  indrah  satakratuh  lipa  no 
haribhih  sutam  may  he  ivho  above  all  is  knoivn  as  the  best 
Vrtra-slayer,  Indra  Satakratu,  (come)  to  our  pressed  Soma 
with  his  bays  (viii.  93^^) ;  gavam  6se  sakhya  krnuta  dvita 
(x.  48^)  in  the  search  for  the  cows  he  especially  concluded  friend- 
ship (with  me). 

u.  The  word  occur.s  several  times  with  ddha,  meaning  itnd  thai  too 
douhhj  or  cs2>ecicdly,  e.g.  vi  t^d  vocer  ddha  dvita  explain  (his,  and  (do  so; 
particulurlij  (i.  132^). 

na  has  two  senses  in  V.  (but  only  the  first  of  the  two 
in  B.) : 

1.  As  a  negative  particle  meaning  not  it  denies  an  assertion, 

appearing  in  principal  sentence:^  with  the  ind.  of  all  tenses, 

with  the  subj.,  the  opt.,  the  inj.  (in  the  sense  of  a  fut.),  but 

not  with  the  impv.  ;   it  is  also  employed  in  relative  and 

conjunctional  clauses.     It  negatives  either  the  assertion  of 

the  whole  sentence  (when  it  appears  as  near  the  beginning 

as  possible,   in  V.   even  before   the  relative)   or   only  the 

assertion  of  the  verb.     It  can  only  be  used  in  a  sentence 

which  contains  a  finite  verb  or  in  which  one  is  to  be  supplied. 

There  seems  to  be  no  undoubted  example  of  its  negativing 

any  word  (such  as  a  participle  or  adjective)  other  than  the 

verb.     The  employment  of  this  negative  na  is  much  the 

same  in  B.  as  in  V. 

a.  A   verb   (such    as  asti   is)   lias   often    to  be  supijlied   with    this 
negative   in   simple    sentences,   especially    with    the   gerundive,    the 


I 


236  INDECLINABLE   WORDS  [180 

infinitive,  or  a  dative  equivalent  to  an  infinitive ;  e.  g.  tdn  n6,  sur- 
ksyam  tliat  (is)  not,  to  be  troubled  about  (MS.) ;  nd  yo  vdraya  ivho  (is)  not 
for  hindering  =  ivJio  is  irresistible  (i.  1435).  Qr  the  verb  has  to  be 
supplied  in  a  second  sentence  from  the  first ;  e.  g.  nd.ktain  upa 
tisthate,  n£  prat^h  he  worships  at  night,  (he  does)  not  (worship)  in  the 
morning  (TS.)- 

b.  Two  negatives  express  a  strong  positive  ;  e.g.  na  hi  pasdvo  n& 
bhunjanti/or  cattle  always  cat  (MS.). 

2.  na  is  used  in  V.  (very  commonly  in  RV.,  comparatively 
rarely  in  A V. ,  but  never  in  B. )  as  a  particle  of  comparison, 
exactly  like  iva  as,  like.  This  meaning  seems  to  be  derived 
from  not  as  negativing  the  predicate  of  a  thing  to  which  it 
properly  belongs ;  e.  g.  '  he  (neighs),  not  a  hoi'se  neighs '  = 
'  he,  though  not  a  horse,  neighs '  =  '  he  neighs  like  a  horse  '. 
This  na,  being  in  sense  closely  connected  with  the  preceding 
word,  never  coalesces  in  pronunciation  (though  it  does  in  the 
written  Sandhi)  with  a  following  vowel,  whereas  na  not 
generally  does.  This  na  always  follows  the  word  of  com- 
parison to  which  it  belongs ;  or  if  the  simile  consists  of 
several  words,  the  na  generally  follows  the  first  word,  less 
commonly  the  second  ;  e.g.  aran  na  nemih  pari  ta  babhuva 
he  surrounds  them  as  the  fell//  the  spokes  (i.  S2^-') ;  pakva 
sakha  na  like  a  branch  with  ripe  fruit  (i.  8''). 

a.  When  the  object  compared  is  addressed  in  the  voc.  (which  is 
sometimes  to  be  supplied),  the  object  with  which  it  is  compared  is 
sometimes  also  put  in  the  voc.  agreeing  with  it  by  attraction ;  e.  g. 
dso  na  subhra  a  bhara  like  brilliant  Dawn,  (O  sacrificer)  bring  (i.  57^) ; 
i,ave  na  citre,  arusi  like  a  brilliant  mare,  0  rudely  Dawn  (i.  30^^). 

b.  When  the  object  compared  is  not  expressed,  nd  means  as  it  iverc; 
e.  g.  sivabhir  n^  smayamanabhir  agat  he  has  come  icHh  gracious  smiling 
loomen  as  it  were  (i.  79^). 

c.  nd  sometimes  interchanges  with  iva  ;  «.  g.  rdtham  ud,  tdsteva 
t&tsinaya  as  a  carpenter  (fashions)  a  car  for  him  who  desires  if  (i.  61*). 

na-kis^  {not  any  one)  is  found  in  V.  only,  being  almost 
restricted  to  the  RV.,  where  it  frequently  occurs.    It  properly 


^  N.  sing,  of  interrogative  ki  (Lfit.  qui-s)  of  which  the  n.  kf-m  is  in 
regular  use  'cp.  113). 


ISO]     CONJUNCTIVE  AND  ADVBL.  PARTICLES     237 

means  no  one ;  e.  g.  nakir  indra  tvad  uttarah  no  one, 
0  Indra,  is  superior  to  thee  (iv.  30^) ;  yatha  krminam  nakir 
ucchisyatai  that  none  of  the  worms  shall  he  left  (AV.  ii.  3P). 
Losing  its  N.  sense/  it  comes  to  be  used,  though  less  often, 
as  a  strong  negative  adverb  meaning  not  at  all,  never ;  e.  g. 
yasya  sarman  nakir  deva  varayante  na  martah.  in  whose 
protection  gods  never  hinder  him  nor  mortals  (iv.  17"^).  Cp. 
makis. 

na-kim  ^  occurs  only  twice  in  one  hymn  of  the  RV.  in  the 
sense  of  a  strong  negative  adverb  =  not  at  all,  never  :  nakim 
indro  nikartave  Indra  can  never  be  subdned  (viii.  78^). 

na-nu  occurs  only  tw^ice  in  the  RV.  where  it  has  the  sense 
of  a  strong  negative  =  hi/  no  means,  never.  In  B.  it  occurs 
a  few  times  as  an  interrogative  expecting  assent  (=  nonne), 
not?;  e.g.  nanu  susruma  have  we  not  heard?  (SB.), 

na-hi,  as  the  compounded  form  of  na  hi,  occurs  only  in  V., 

where  it  sometimes  has  the  sense  of  for  not ;  e.  g.  nahi  tva 

satruh  starate  for  no  foe  strilces  thee  down  (i.  129"^).     More 

commonly  it  emphatically  negatives  a  statement  as  something 

well  known  =  certainly  not,  by  no  means,  as  appears  most 

clearly  at  the  beginning  of  a  hymn  ;    e.  g.  nahi  vo  asty 

arbhako,  d^vasah  not  one  of  you,  0  gods,  is  small  (viii.  30^). 

«.  This  compounded  form  never  occurs  in  B.,  where  n£  hi  alone  is 
found.     On  the  other  hand,  na  hi  seems  never  to  occur  in  V. 

nama  is  used  adverbially  in  the  following  two  senses : 
1.  by  name  ;  e.g.  sa  ha  sruta  indro  nama  devah  that  god 
famous  as  Indra  by  name  (ii.  20'') ;  k6  nama^asi  zvho  art  thou 
byname?  (VS.  vii.  29).  2.  namely,  indeed,  verily;  e.g.  ajasro 
gharmo  havir  asmi  nama  I  am  constant  heat,  namely  the 
oblation  (iii.  26") ;  mam  dhur  indram  nama  devata  they 
have  placed  me  among  the  gods  verily  as  Indra  (x.  49^). 


'  Pi-obably  because  the  N.  has  no  longer  an  independent  existence 
coupled  with  the  fact  that  the  pronoun  ki  has  gone  out  of  use  except 
in  the  one  form  ki-m. 

•  Probably  A.  n.  of  nfi-kis  with  lengthened  vowel. 


238  INDECLINABLE   WORDS  [180 

nu '  or  nu'- means  1.  now;  e.g.  sa  nv  lyate  he  is  noiv 
implored  (i.  145^) ;  indrasya  nu  viryani  pra  vocam  I  ivill 
now  proclaim  the  heroic  deeds  of  Indra  (i.  32') ;  yoja  nv, 
indra,  te  hari  i/oJce  noiv  (=  at  once),  0  Indra,  thy  two  hai/s 
(i.  82') ;  uvasosa  uehac  ca  nii  (i.  48^)  Daun  has  shone  (in 
the  past)  and  she  shall  shine  noiv  (=  henceforth) ;  asmabhir 
u  nu  praticaksya^abhut  to  us  she  has  just  noiv  become  visible 
(i.  113^^).  2,  still:  pasyema  nu  suryam  uccarantam  we 
woidd  still  see  the  sun  rising  (vi.  52"') ;  mahan  indrah  paras 
oa  nii  great  is  Indra  and  still  more  (i.  8^).  3.  pray  with 
interrogatives  :  kada  nv  antar  varune  bhuvani  when,  pray 
(=  at  last),  shall  I  he  in  (communion  with)  Varuna  (vii.  86-). 
4.  ever  with  relatives :  ya  nu  krnavai  tvhatever  (deeds) 
I  shall  accomplish  (i.  1Q5^^).  5.  ever,  at  all  with  negatives : 
na^asya  varta  na  taruta  nv  asti  there  is  none  at  all  to 
obstruct,  none  to  overcome  him  (vi.  66-).  6.  with  cid  it  means 
(a)  even  now,  still ;  e.g.  nu  cid  dadhisva  me  girah  even  now 
taJce  to  thyself  my  songs  (i.  10^) ;  dasasya  no,  maghavan,  nu 
cit  favour  us  still,  Bountiful  one  (viii.  46^^) ;  (6)  never ;  e.  g. 
nu  cid  dhi  parimamnathe  asman  for  never  have  ye  despised 
us  (vii.  936). 

a.  The  senses  of  nti  found  in  B.  are  the  following  : 
1.  Now  actually  in  aifirmative  sentences,  often  correcting  a  previous 
statement ;  e.  g.  nirdaso  nv  abhud,  yajasva  ma^anena  now  he  is  actually 
more  than  ten  days  old  :  sacrifice  him  to  me  (AB.).  2.  then,  pray,  in  exhorta- 
tions with  the  subj.,  the  impv.,  or  ma  with  the  inj.,  e.g.  Iraddhadevo 
vd,i  mdnur  :  avdm  nii  vedava  Manu  is  godfearing;  let  us  two  then  try  him 
(6b.)  ;  ma  nu  me  prfi  harsih  praj/,  do  not  strike  at  me  (SB.).  When 
dtha  follows  such  sentences,  nii  may  be  translated  by  first:  nirdaso 
nv  astv,  atha  tva  yajai  let  him  (the  victim) /?rs<  be  more  than  ten  days  old, 
then  I  ivill  sacrifice  htm  to  you  (AB.).  3.  pray,  in  questions  with  or  without 
an  interrogative  ;  e.  g.  kvk,  nu  visnur  abhut  ivhat,  pray,  has  become  of 
Vipiu  ?  (6B.)  ;  tv&m  nu  khfilu  no  brfihmistho  'si  are  you,  pray,  indeed 
the  wisest  of  us?  (SB.).  4.  noiv,  after  iti  followed  by  fi,tha  7iext:  iti  nu 
piirvam  patalam,  athottaram  this  now  is  the  first  section  ;   next  follows  the 


^  Never  begins  a  sentence. 
^  Often  begins  a  sentence. 


180]     CONJUNCTIVE  AND  ADVBL.  PARTICLES     230 

second  (AB.).  5.  indeed,  in  the  first  of  two  antithetical  chiuses,  wlicn 
the  second  is  introduced  with  tii  or  kim  u  ;  e.  g.  yo  nv  ev&  jnatds 
tfismai  bruyad,  ni,  tv  ev^  sdirvasma  iva  he  man  indi'od  iell  it  fo  him  who 
IS  known  to  him,  but  not  to  any  and  erenj  one  (_SB.). 

nnnam  noiv  has  three  uses  in  the  RV. : 

1.  With  the  ind.  pres.  it  means  now  as  opposed  to  formerly 
or  in  future  (an  opposition  often  expressed  by  pura  before 
and  aparam  after) ;  e.  g.  na  nunam  asti  no  svah  there  is  no 
now  and  no  to-morrow  (i.  170^). 

It  is  a  few  times  used  with  the  perfect  in  combination 
with  pura  to  express  that  an  action  has  taken  place  in  the 
past  and  still  takes  place ;  e.  g.  pura  nunam  ca  stutaya 
rsinarn  pasprdhra  indre  formerly  and  now  the  praises  of 
seers  have  striven  to  Indra  (vi.  34^). 

2.  With  the  subj.,  impv.,  opt.,  or  inj.,  it  expresses  that  an 
action  is  to  take  place  at  once ;  e.  g.  vi  nunam  uchat  she 
shall  now  shine  forth  (i.  124^^);  pra  nunam  purnavandhuras 
stut6  ysilii praised  advance  note  with  laden  car  (i.  82^). 

With  the  perfect  it  is  a  few  times  used  in  the  RV.  to 
express  that  an  action  has  just  been  completed  ;  e.  g.  upa 
nunam  yuyuje  hari  he  has  just  yoJccd  his  two  bay  steeds 
(viii.  411). 

3.  It  occurs  sometimes  with  interrogatives  =  _pra?/ ;  e.g. 
kada  nunam  te  dasema  tvhen,  pray,  may  we  serve  thee? 
(vii.  293). 

rt.  In  B.  none  of  these  uses  seem  to  survive,  while  the  new  sense  of 
certainly,  assuredly  (perhaps  once  already  in  the  AV.)  has  appeared  ; 
e.  g.  tatha  In  nuri&m  tdd  asa.  just  so  assuredly  it  came  to  pass  (SB.). 

n^d  (=  na  id  and  not  treated  as  a  compound  by  the 
Padapatha)  has  two  uses  in  both  V.  and  B.  :  1.  sometimes 
as  an  emphatic  negative,  certainly  not ;  e.  g.  anyo  n6t  surir 
6hate  bhuridavattarah  no  other  patron  indeed  is  accounted 
more  liberal  (viii.  5-") ;  dham  vadami  n6t  tvam  I  am  speah- 
ing,  not  thou  (vii.  38*) ;  n6d  anuhutam  prasnami  I  certainly 
do  not  cat  it  before  it  is  invoiced  (SB.).  2.  much  more  commonly 
as  introducing  a  final  clause  in  order  that  not  with  the  subj. 


240  INDECLINABLE   WORDS  [iso 

(=  Lat.  ne) ;  e.  g.  vy  iicha,  duhitar  divo,  u6t  tva  tapati 
surah  shine  forth,  daughter  of  the  sk/j,  test  the  sun  scorch  thee 
(v.  79'^) ;  n^n  ma  rudro  hinasat  lest  Tiudra  injure  me  (SB.). 
In  B.  the  verb  may  also  be  in  the  inj. :  n6d  idam  bahirdha 
yajnad  bhavat  lest  it  be  outside  the  sacrifice  (SB.). 

rt.  nv^i  (  =  mi  vd.i  as  analysed  by  the  Padapatha  of  the  TS.)  occurs  not 
infrequently  in  B.  in  the  sense  of  indeed  ;  e.g.  iti  nva  et^d  brahmanam 
udyate  such  indeed  is  the  Brdhmana  that  is  told  (SB.). 

ma  is  the  pi-ohibitive  negative  (Grk.  fiij)  regularly  used 
with  the  injunctive.  It  is  never  used  with  the  impv.  ;  with 
the  opt.  only  in  the  single  form  bhujema  (RV.) ;  and  with 
the  subj.  only  once  (SB.) ;  e.  g.  ma  no  vadhih  sla)/  us  iwt 
(i.  104'') ;  ma  hrnitha  abhy  asman  be  not  enraged  against  us 
(viii.  2^% 

a.  An  interrogative  following  ma  in  a  few  cases  receives  an  indefi- 
nite sense  in  the  RV.  ;  e.  g.  ma  kfismai  dhatam  abhy  amitrine  nah 

delirer  ns  not  to  ani/foe    i.  120*). 

ma-kis  {not  any  one,  Gk.  firj-ris:),  occurring  about  a  dozen 
times  in  the  RV.,  to  which  it  is  restricted,  is  used  in  pro- 
hibitive sentences  with  the  injunctive  in  two  senses : 

1.  no  one:  makis  tokasya  no  risat  maij  no  one  of  our 
offspring  be  injured  (viii.  67^^). 

2.  more  often  an  emphatic  negative  =  by  no  means,  never : 
makir  devanam  apa  bhuh  l)c  not  at  all  atvay  from  the  gods 
(x.  IV).     Cp.  na-kis. 

ma-kim,  used  as  an  emphatic  prohibitive  particle  with 
the  injunctive,  occurs  only  in  two  passages  of  the  RV. : 
makim  sam  sari  k^vate  let  none  suffer  fracture  in  a  int 
(vi.  54'). 

yatra  is  employed  in  two  main  senses  :  1.  usually  as 
a  relative  adverb,  meaning  cohere,  but  sometimes  whitJie)  , 
©•  g-  yajfie  .  .  ndro  yatra  devayavo  madanti  where  pious 
men  rejoice  in  sacrifice  (vii.  97^) ;  yatra  rathena  gaohathah 
whither  ye  go  with  your  car  (i.  22*).  The  correlative  is 
generally  tatra,  sometimes  atra  or  tad. 


180]     CONJUNCTIVE  AND  ADVBL.  PARTICLES     241 

a.  Occasionally  as  equivalent  to  the  locative  of  the  relative;  e.g. 
a  gha  ta  gachan  littara  yugani  ydtra  jamdiyah  krndvann  fijauji  (hose 
Infer  generations  ivill  come  in  n-hicJi  those  who  are  akin  nrill  do  xchat  befits  not 
kinsmen  (x.  10^*). 

2.  not  infrequently  as  a  temporal  conjunction,  ivhen,  in 
both  V.  and  B.  ;  e.  g.  yatra  pra  sudasam  avatam  when  ije 
liclped  Sudds  (vii.  83'"').  In  V.  adha,  atra,  tad  appear  as 
correlatives  ;  e.  g.  yatra  sui'asas  tauvo  vitanvat6  .  .  adha 
sma  yacha  tanv6  tane  ca  chardih.  /vJien  the  heroes  strain 
theinselves  (in  battle)  .  .  then  especially  hestow  protection  on  us 
and  our  sons  (vi.  4(P-).  In  B.  tad  is  generally  the  correlative, 
sometimes  tatas ;  e.  g.  tarn  yatra  deva  aghnams,  tan 
mitram  abruvan  irJicn  the  f/ods  MM  him,  thet/  said  to 
Mifra  (SB.). 

yatha  has  two  distinct  uses  in  both  V.  and  B. : 

1.  as  a  relative  adverb  meaning  as ;  e.  g.  nunam  yatha 
pura  noiv  as  before  (i.  89") ;  yatha  vayam  usmasi  tat  krdhi 
as  we  wish  that  do  (x.  38-) ;  yatha  vai  puruso  jiryaty  evam 
agnir  ahito  jiryati  as  a  man  groios  old,  so  fire  ivhen  it  has 
been  laid  grows  old  (TS.).  When  there  is  a  correlative  in  the 
RV.,  it  is  usually  eva,  sometimes  tatha  :  in  B.  usually 
evam,  sometimes  tatha. 

2.  as  a  conjunction  meaning  in  order  that,  so  that,  intro- 
ducing a  posterior  clause,  generally  with  the  subj..  rarely 
the  opt.  ;  e.  g.  havis  krnusva  subhago  yatha^asasi  prepare 
the  oblation  that  thou  mayest  be  successful  (ii.  26'-) ;  a  daivya 
vrnimahe  'vamsi,  yatha  bhavema  milhiise  anagah  (vii.  97-) 
we  crave  divine  aids  that  we  may  appear  sinless  to  the  gracious 
god :  tatha  me  kuru  yatha^aham  imam  senam  jayani 
arrange  it  so  for  me  that  I  may  conquer  this  army  (AB.) ; 
tathaiva  hotavyam  yatha^agnim  vyaveyat  it  must  be 
poured  so  that  it  should  divide  the  fire  (SB.). 

«.  In  the  RV.  after  verbs  of  knowing  or  saying  yatha  introduces  an 
explanation  =  hoic ;  e.  g.  kds  t^d  brxiyad  anud^yi  yathaj^dbhavat  7oho 
could  tell  MS  this,  (viz.)  how  the  gift  teas:'  (x.  135''}.  Occasionally  it  is 
used  thus  even  without  such  verbs :   nd  prarafye  savitur  ddivyasya 

1819  R 


242  INDECLINABLE  WOEDS"  [180 

l&d  ydtha  visvam  bhuvanam  dharayisydti  ihai  (power)  of  the  divine 
Savifr  (is  not  fo  =)  will  not  decay,  (viz.)  that  he  will  support  the  whole  icorld 
(iv.  54«). 

yad  (n.  of  the  relative  ya)  is  used  in  four  distinct  senses : 

1.  tliat,  expanding  the  meaning  of  a  word  in  the  preceding 
principal  clause  ;  e.g.  grn6  tad,  indra,  te  savo  yad  dhaipsi 
vrtram  I  praise  this  might//  deed  of  thine  that  thou  slayest 
Vrtra  (viii.  62*^) ;  kim  aga  asa,  varuna,  jy^stham  yat 
stotaram  jighamsasi  sakhayam,  what  has  been  the  chief  guilt, 
0  Varuna,  that  thou  wishest  to  slay  thy  praiser  (who  is)  tliy 

friend?  (vii.  86*j.     This  use  is  not  common  in  V. 

«.  yad  is  similarly  employed  in  B.  with  reference  to  a  preceding 
tdd  (often  omitted)  ;  e.  g.  t^d  ydt  payasa  srlnati  :  vrtro  v&i  soma 
asit  that  (=  the  reason  why)  he  mixes  Soma  wifh  mill-  ijs)  this:  Vrtra 
was  Soma  (8B.).  This  nse  is  also  found  in  B.  after  certain  verbs  : 
fiva  kalpate  it  is  suitable,  ut  sahate  is  able,  ich^ti  desires,  yakt6  bhavati 
is  intent  on,  veda  knoivs,  and  isvara  it  is  possible  ;  e.  g.  n^  hi  td.d  avak^l- 
pate  ydd  bruyat /or  it  is  )wt  suitable  that  he  should  saij  (^B.). 

2.  n^ien  with  the  ind.  pres.,  imp.,  perf.,  aor.,  fut.,  and 
with  the  subj.  ;  e.g.  yad  dha  yantl  marutah  sam  ha 
bruvate  ivhen  the  Mantis  go  along,  they  spealc  together  (i.  37^^) ; 
kam  apasyo  yat  te  bhir  agachat  ivhom  didst  thou  see  when 
fear  came  upon  thee  ?  (i.  82'*) ;  indras  ca  yad  yuyudhate 
ahis  ca,  maghava  vi  jigye  n-lien  Indra  and  the  serpent  fought, 
the  hountiful  god  conquered  (i.  32^^') ;  citro  yad  abhrat  bright 
fflien  he  has  shone  forth  (i.  66'^) ;  tigma  yad  asanir  patati, 
adha  no  bodhi  gopah  when  the  sharp  holt  shall  fly,  then  he 
our  protector  (iv.  16^'^).  It  also  occurs  rarely  in  anacolutha 
with  the  pres.  part,  and  the  past  pass.  part,  much  as  in 
English ;  e.  g.  pacanti  te  vrsabhan,  atsi  t6sam  yd.n, 
maghavan,  huyamanah  they  roast  hulls  for  thee,  thou  eatest 
of  them,  0  bounteous  one,  tchen  being  called  (x.  28"'). 

a.  In  B.  ydd  occurs  with  tlie  sense  of  when  with  the  pres..  fut.,  and 
aor.,  and  in  the  sense  of  ichenever  or  ivhile  with  the  impf. 

8.  v/used  with  the  ind.  pres..  the  subj.,  or  the  opt.  ;  e.g. 


]S0]     CONJUNCTIVE  AND  ADVBL.  PARTICLES     248 

yad,  indrd,  udaii  nyag  va  huyase,  a  yahi  tuyam  //, 
0  Indra.  thou  art  caUccl  ctJjove  or  hctoiv,  come  quicUi/  (viii.  65^) ; 
yad  urdhvas  tistha  dravina^iha  dhattad  yad  va  ksayah 
if  thou  Shalt  stand  upright,  bestow  treasures  here,  or  if  thou  shalt 
lie  (iii.  8').  The  opt.  is  used  when  it  is  assumed  that  the 
condition  will  not  be  fulfilled  ;  e.  g.  yad,  agne,  syam  aham 
tvam,  tvam  va  gha  sya  aham,  syus  te  satya  iha^asisah 
if  0  Agni,  I  were  thou,  or  if  thou  iccrt  I,  ihij  prayers  here 
u-Qidd  he  fulfilled  (viii.  44-"). 

a.  In  B.  ydd  is  used  with  the  opt.  as  in  V.  while  with  y^di  the  ful- 
fihnent  of  the  condition  is  usually  assumed)  and  with  the  conditional  ; 
sa  yd,d  bhidyeta^artini  arched  y^jamanah  if  it  xcere  to  break,  the 
itacriftcer  xmvM  fall  into  misforhine  (TS.) ;  ydd  evam  nd^dvaksyo  murdha 
te  vy  apatisyat  ifilioii  luidsi  not  spoktir  lima,  fin/  head  icould  have  fallen  to 
pieces  (SB.). 

4.  in  order  that,  in  posterior  clauses,  with  the  subj.,  very 
rarely  with  the  opt.  in  V. ;  e.  g.  a  vaha  devatatiip  sardho 
yad  adya  divyarn  yajasi  bring  hither  the  host  of  the  gods  that 
thou  magest  adore  tJie  divine  throng  (iii.  19"^) ;  yan  nunam 
asyam  gatim,  mitrasya  yayam  patha  that  I  mag  now 
obtain  refuge,  f  umuld  go  on  Mitra's  path  (v.  64''). 

((.  In  B.  this  use  of  ydd  is  very  rare,  occurring  only  a  few  limes 
with  the  subj. ;  e.  g.  t^t  prapnuhi  y<lt   te  prano  vatam  apipddyatai 

(Main  thou  this,  that  thy  hreath  may  pat.s  intu  the  irind  (SB.). 

yada  when  is  used  in  V.  and  B.  with  the  ind.  perf.,  impf., 
pres.,  and  with  the  subj.  ;  with  the  aor.  ind.  and  the  inj.  in 
V.  only ;  and  with  the  fut.  and  opt.  in  B.  only.  The 
correlative  word  (when  there  is  one)  is  in  V.  ad,  atha,  adha, 
tdd,  tarhi ;  in  B.  atha  and  tarhi. 

1.  yada  is  most  commonly  used  in  the  RV.  with  the  aor. 
ind.,  when  as  the  beginning  of  the  action  is  emphasized, 
the  sense  is  as  soon  as ;  e.  g.  yad^d  adevir  asahista  maya, 
atha^abhavat  kevalah  s6mo  asya  as  soon  as  lie  had  overcome 
the  ungodlji  wiles,  then  Soma  became  his  exclusivehj  (vii.  98^') ; 
abhi  grnanti  radho  yada  te  marto  ami  bhogam  anat  they 

b2 


244  INDECLINABLE   WOEDS  [180 

praise  tlui  tvealth  as  soon  as  the  mortal  has  dbtamcd  tin/  reward 
(x.  7^).  When  the  principal  clause  contains  a  historical 
tense,  the  aor.  with  yada  has  the  value  of  a  pluperfect. 

a.  Tlie  injunctive  is  found  only  once  with  yada  in  the  RV.  :  yada 
mfihyara  didharo  bhag^m,  Indra,  ad  in  ra&jk  krnavo  viryani  irJien 
Own  shall  have  necured  for  me  mij  f:hare,  0  Indra,  then  thou  ahalf  perform 
heroic  deeds  ivith  my  help  (viii.  100^). 

2.  a.  with  the  impf.  and  perf.  ;  e.  g.  yada  visnus  trini 
pada  vicakrame,  yada  suryam  divi  . .  adharaya,  ad  it  te 
hari  vavaksatuh  icheii  Vimu  toolc  his  three  steps,  when  thou 
didst  fix  the  sun  in  the  shy,  then  thy  two  lays  grew  in  strength 
(viii.  122'>^") ;  tasya  yada  marma^agachann  atha^acestat 
as  soon  as  they  touched  Iris  weaJc  spot,  he  quivered  (MS.) ;  sa 
yada^abhyam  anuvaca^atha^asya  tad  indrah  siras  ci- 
cheda  as  soon  as  he  had  told  them,  Indra  cut  his  head  of{^B.). 

h.  with  the  pres.  ind.  :  yada  satyam  krnute  manyiim 
indro,  visvam  drlham  bhayate  6jad  asmat  wJien  Indra 
shows  Ms  true  anger,  all  that  is  firm,  trembling,  is  afraid  of  him 
(iv.  17^") ;  yada  vai  pasur  nirdaso  bhavaty  atha  sa 
medhyo  bhavati  as  soon  as  the  victim  is  more  than  ten  days 
old,  it  heconies  fit  for  sacrifice  (AB.) ;  sa  yada  kesasmasrii 
vdpaty  atha  snati  n-hrn  he  has  cut  ofi^his  hair  and  beard,  he 
bathes  (SB.). 

c.  with  the  subj.  (here  =  future  perfect) :  yada  srtam 
krnavo  'tha^im  enam  pra  hinutat  pitrbhyah  when  thou 
shalt  have  made  him  done,  then  deliver  him  to  the  fathers  (x.  16^) ; 
yada  tarn  ativardha,  atha  karsum  khatva  tasyam  ma 
bibharasi  when  I  shall  have  grown  too  big  for  it,  you  shall, 
having  dug  a  pit,  heep  me  in  it  (SB.). 

8.  a.  with  the  fut.  :  yadaiva  hota  paridhasyaty  atha  pasan  prati 
moksyami  n-hen  the  Hotr  shall  hace  conchided,  I  sJiall  tighten  the  cords  {A'B.). 

b.  with  the  opt.  :  s£  yada  samgramdm  j&yed  fitha^aindragndm  uir 
vapet  as  sooj^  as  he  may  have  icon  a  haftle,  he  should  sacrifice  to  Indra  and 
Agni  (MS.). 

yadi  (/"(sometimes  when  with  a  past  tense)  is  found  with 
perf.  and  impf.  in  V.  only;  with  the  ind.   pres.,  aor.,  fut., 


l^o]     CONJUNCTIVE  AND  ADVBL.  PAETICLES     245 

and  with  the  subj.  in  V.  and  B.  ;  and  with  the  opt.  in  B. 
only. 

1.  With  the  pert",  used  hibtorically  and  with  the  inipf. 
yadi  means  ivhen,  the  verb  then  having  the  force  of  a 
pluperfect ;  e.  g.  lid  astambhit  samidha  nakam  agnir  yadi 
bhrgubhyah  pari  matarisva  havyavaham  samidhe  Agni 
supported  the  vault  iclth  fuel  ■when  Matarisvan  from  the  Bhrgus 
had  Idndled  the  oblation-bearer  (iii.  5^°)  ;  yadi  sahasram 
mahisan  aghah,  ad  it  ta  indriyam  mahi  pra  vavrdhe 
a-hen  thou  hadsf  eaten  a  thousand  bulls,  thy  might  gretv  great 
(viii.  12^).  But  when  the  perf.  has  the  pres.  perf.  sense, 
yadi  has  its  ordinary  meaning  of  if:  grahir  jagraha  yadi 
vaitad  enam,  tasya,  indragni,  pra  mumuktam  enam  or  if 
illness  has  seised  him,  from  that  release  him,  Indra  and  Agni 
(x.  1611). 

2.  a.  with  the  pres. :  yadi  manthanti  bahubhir  vi 
rocate  when  theg  rub  witli  their  arms,  he  shines  (iii.  29*^) ; 
adya  muriya  yadi  yatudhano  asmi  to-day  I  would  die,  if  I 
am  a  sorcerer  (vii.  104^"') ;  yadi  na  asnati  pitrdevatyo 
bhavati  if  he  does  not  eat,  he  becomes  dedicated  to  the 
3Ianes  (SB.). 

b.  with  the  aor.  :  yadi  matur  lipa  svasa  .  .  asthita, 
adhvaryur  modate  if  the  sister  (coming) //om  the  mother  has 
approached,  the  priest  rejoices  (ii.  5") ;  yady  aha^enam  pran- 
cam  acaisir,  yatha  paraca  asinaya  prsthato  'nnadyam 
upaharet  if//ou  liave  piled  it  frontways,  it  is  as  if  one  handed 
food  from  behind  to  one  sitting  with  averted  face  (SB.). 

c.  with  the  fut. :  yady  eva  karisyatha,  sakam  devair 
yajniyaso  bhavisyatha  if  ye  will  act  thus,  ye  shall  become 
objects  of  worship  together  with  the  gods  (i.  161-) ;  yadi  va 
imam  abhimamsye  kaniyo  'nnam  karisye  // 1  shall  plot 
against  him,  I  shall  procure  less  food  (SB.). 

d.  with  the  subj. :  yajama  devan  yadi  saknavama  we 
will  worship  the  gods,  if  we  shall  be  able  (i.  27^^) ;  yadi  stomam 
mama  sravad,  asmakam  indram  indavah  .  .  mandantu 


24^  INDECLINABLE   WOKDS  [180 

if  he  shall  hear  mi/  song  of  praise,  let  our  drops  gladden  Indra 
(viii.  1^ ') ;  yadi  tva^etat  piinar  bravatas,  tvam  brutat 
if  thejj  Uvo  shall  sag  that  to  thee  again,  do  thou  say  (SB.). 

a.  With  the  opt.  yddi  is  (excepting  one  occurrence  in  the  &V.) 
found  in  B.  only,  where  this  use  is  very  common.  Here  a  case  is 
usually  supposed  with  a  rule  applicable  to  it  in  the  principal  clause  ; 
c.  g.  yadi  na  saknuyat,  so  guaye  purolasam  nir  vapet  if  he  should  nof 
be  able  to  do  if,  he  should  offer  a  cake  to  Agni  (AB.  . 

8.  after  the  verb  vid  Jcnoir,  yadi  is  used  in  the  sense  of 
tchether  in  one  passage  of  the  KV,  (x.  129')  and  often  in  B.  ; 
e.  g.  hanta  na  6ko  v6ttu  yadi  hato  va  vrtro  jivati  va  come, 
let  one  of  us  find  out  irhether  Vrtra  is  dead  or  whether  he  is 
alive  (SB.). 

a.  ySdi  va  is  not  only  used  after  a  preceding  yadi  in  the  sense  of 
or  if,  but  also  alone  in  the  sense  of  or,  nearly  always  without  a  verb  ; 
e.  g.  so  anga  veda  yadi  va  na  veda  lie  alone  knows  or  he  does  not  know 
(x.  129') ;  yam  vahanti  satam  asva  yadi  va  sapta  ivhoin  a  hundred 
horses  draio,  or  seven  (AV.  xiii.  2"    ;  yadi  va^itarathix  or  conversehj  (SB.;. 

yfi,rhi  {at  the  time)  ichen  occurs  only  in  B. ,  where  it  is  used  with  the 
pres.  or  past  ind.,  and  with  the  opt.  It  has  almost  invariably  tarhi  or 
etarhi  then  as  a  correlative  ;  e.  g.  sa  tarhy  eva  jayate  yarhy  aguim 
adhatte  he  is  born  at  the  moment  when  he  lays  his  fire  MS.)  ;  yarhi  prajah. 
ksudham  nigaeheyus  tarhi  navaratrena  yajeta  ichen  his  people  should 
suffer  from,  luimjer,  he  should  sacrifice  u:ith  the  rite  of  nine  nights  (TS.). 

y^smad  does  not  occur  as  a  conjunction  in  V.,  but  it  sometimes 
appears  as  such  in  B.  meaning  ichy ;  e.  g.  atha  yasraat  samista- 
yaJTinisi  nama  now  (follows  the  reason)  why  fJtei/  are  called  Samistuyajas 
(SB.)'.  ■ 

yad  (an  old  abl.  of  ya)  is  found  in  V.  only.  It  is  used 
with  the  indicative  pres.  or  past,  and  with  the  subj.  With 
the  ind.  it  means  as  far  as  in  the  RV. ;  e.  g.  arcamasi  yad 
eva  vidma  tat  tva  mahantam  (vi.  21'')  we  praise  thee,  the 
great,  as  far  as  we  Icnow  (how  to) ;  it  seems  to  mean  since  in 
the  AY. :  ya  aksiyan  prthivim  yad  ajayata  irlio  ruled  the 
earth  since  it  arose  (AV.  xii.  1"'').  With  the  subj.  yad  means 
as  long  as ;  e.  g.  ananukrtyam  apunas  cakara  yat  suryamasa 
naitha  uccarata^i  he  has  once  for  all  done  what  is  inimitahlc 
as  long  as  sun  and  moon  aUernatclg  shall  rise  (x.  08^"). 


180]     CONJUNCTIVE  AND  ADVBL.  PARTICLES    247 

yavat  already  appears  in  V.  as  an  adverb  meaning  as  far 
as,  as  long  as,  an  extension  of  its  ace.  use ;  e.  g.  yavad 
dyavaprthivi  tavad  it  tat  (x.  114*)  as  far  as  heaven  and  earth, 
so  far  it  (extends) ;  jiihomi  havyam  yavad  ise  /  o_fer 
oblation  as  long  as  I  am  able  (iii.  18'') ;  ajato  vai  tavat  puruso 
yavad  agnim  na^adhatt^  man  is  so  long  unborn,  as  he  does 
not  lag  his  fire  (MS.)- 

va  or  is  employed  much  in  the  same  way  as  ca  and. 
It  is  enclitic,  following  the  word  to  which  it  belongs  ;  and 
it  connects  words,  clauses,  or  sentences  ;  e.  g.  ata  a  gahi 
divo  va  I'ocanad  adhi  come  from  here  or  from  the  shining 
realm  of  heaven  (i.  6") ;  yasya  bharya  gaur  va  yamau 
janayet  irhose  ivife  or  coic  bears  twins  (AB.) ;  prati  yah 
sasam  invati,  uktha  va  yo  abhigrnati  irho  promotes  the  law 
or  welcomes  songs  of  praise  (i.  54'). 

".  va...va  is  fi'equenlly  used  in  the  same  way  ;  e.g.  sakti  va  ydt  te 
cakrma  vida  va  ihat  we  have  offered  to  thee  according  to  our  vower  or 
knowledge  (i.  31^*)  ;  ndktam  va  hi  diva  va  varsati  for  it  rains  by  night 
or  hij  dag  (TS.) ;  yad  va^aham  abhidudroha  yad  va  sepa  uta^dnrtam 
what  evil  I  have  plotted  or  what  I  have  sworn  false! g  (i.  2:1-2). 

h.  But  va...va  also  mean  either. ..or.  When  they  contrast  two 
l)nncipal  sentences  in  this  sense,  implying  exclusive  alternatives,  the 
verb  of  the  first  is  accented  even  when  the  second  is  incomplete  ; 
e.  g.  ahaye  va  tan  pradadatu  soma  a  va  dadhatu  nirrter  up^sthe  let 
Soma  either  deliver  them  to  the  serpent  or  place  them  in  the  lap  of  dissolution 
I'vii.  104^) ;  tad  va  jajnau  tad  va  na  jajnau  she  either  agreed  to  it  or  did 
not  agree  to  it  (SB.) ;  tasya  va  ivam  mana  icha  sa  va  tava  either  do  thou 
seek  his  heart,  or  he  thine  (x.  10'*). 

vava  (doubtless  a  contraction  of  two  particles)  is  found  in  B.  only. 
It  emphasizes  the  preceding  word  in  the  sense  oi  certainly,  just,  being 
particularly  frequent  in  the  first  of  two  correlated  clauses;  e.g.  esa 
vav^  so  'gnir  ity  ahuh  that  is  certainly  the  same  Agni,  they  say  (TS.). 

vai  is  an  emphasizing  particle  meaning  tmlg,  indeed. 

1.  In  the  EV.  this  particle  occurs  only  in  28  passages, 
in  all  but  three  of  which  it  follows  the  first  word  of 
the  sentence  ;  e.  g.  bhadram  vai  varam  vrnate  tridg  theg 
malce  a  good  choice  (x.  164-) ;  iti  va  iti  me  manah  so,  indeed, 
so  is  my  mind  (x.  119') ;  na  vai  strainani  sakhyani  santt 


248  INDECLINABLE   WORDS  [180 

there  arc,  indeed,  no  friendships  iriili  iromen  (x.  95^^j.  The 
stress  is  laid  on  the  whole  sentence,  not  on  any  particular 
word.  The  particle  is  often  followed  by  u  (va  u)  without 
any  perceptible  change  of  meaning. 

a.  In  tlie  AV.  the  use  is  similar  except  that  here  the  particle  often 
api^ears  after  a  demonstrative  or  a  relative  ;  e.  g.  tdsmad  wiX  sd.  pfira- 
bhavat  therefore,  imVed.  he peiislud  (xii.  4")  ;  yo  v^i  ta  vidyat  pratyak- 
sain,  sa  va  adyd  mahad  vadet  n-hoever  maij  knon:  Uieui  i^lainlij,  he.  verily, 
may  speak  aloud  to-day  (xi.  8^). 

2.  In  B.  vai  usuallj^  occupies  the  same  position,  but  often 
yields  the  second  place  to  c6d,  hi,  khalu,  and  of  course 
always  to  the  enclitics  iva,  u,  ca,  sma,  ha.  When  atho 
begins  a  sentence  vai  occupies  the  second  place. 

Here  the  use  of  vai  in  the  first  sentence  of  a  narrative  is 
typical ;  e.  g.  yamo  va  amriyata :  t6  deva  yamya  yamam 
apabruvan  Yama  died  :  the  gods  (then)  dissuaded  Yaml  from 
(thinking  of)  Yama  (MS.). 

rt.  The  particle  often  ai:>pears  in  the  concluding  sentence  in  discus- 
sions ;  e.  g.  tSsmad  va  apa  upa  sprsati  that  is,  indeed,  ichy  he  sips 
ivater  (SB.)- 

b.  It  is  very  often  placed  after  the  first  word  of  a  sentence  that 
gives  the  reason  for  the  one  that  follows  ;  e.  g.  sraddhadevo  vai 
mdnur  :  avam  nu  vedava  now  Mami  is  god-fearing  :  >ve  ttco  iciV. 
therefore  ascertain  (SB.).  When  vai  is  used  in  this  way  the  clause 
containing  it  is  often  equivalent  to  a  parentlietical  one ;  e.  g.  te 
vaynm  abruvan  (ayam  vai  vayur  yo  'yam  pdvate)  vayo  tvam  idam 
viddhi^iti  theij  said  to  Vdyu  (noiv  Vdyu  is  he  ivho  blows),  '  Vdyn,  ascertain 
this'  (SB.).  In  this  sense  vai  is  especially  frequent  in  periods  of 
three  clauses,  when  that  with  vai  contains  the  reason,  and  that  with 
evi,  the  conclusion ;  e.  g.  ta  etabhis  tanubhih  sdm  abhavan  ;  pasdvo 
vai  devanam  priyas  tanvah :  pasubhir  eva  sd.m  abhavan  they  were 
togetlier  with  tliese  bodies  ;  now  aiiiiuals  are  the  bodies  dear  to  thv  gods:  they 
tvere  therefore  together  loifh  animals  (MS.). 

c.  The  differences  between  the  use  of  vdi  and  of  eva  in  B.  are  the 
following  :  vdi  coming  after  the  first  word  emphasizes  the  whole 
sentence,  while  eva  emijhasizes  a  particular  word  in  any  jjart  of  the 
sentence  ;  vi,i  follows  the  first  word  of  a  sentence  beginning  a  narra- 
tive, evd.  never  does  ;  in  a  period  vai  is  typical  in  the  clause  stating 
a  reason,  eva  in  that  expressing  the  conclusion. 


180]     CONJUNCTIVE  AND  ADVBL.  PARTICLES     249 
sa  is  often  used  pleonastically  before  relatives  in  B.  ;  e.g. 

r  J.  ' 

sa  yo  no  vacam  vyahrtam  mithundna  na^_,anunikrainat, 
sa  sarvam  para  jayatai  he  icho  shall  not  follow  the  word 
uttered  bii  us  with  (another  of)  the  corresponding  gender,  lie  shall 
lose  every  tiling  (SB.).  This  use  led  to  sa  being  employed  in 
a  formulaic  way  not  only  pleonastically  but  also  without 
reference  to  gender  or  numljer  ;  e.  g.  tasya  tani  sirsani  pra 
cicheda.  sa  yat  somapanam  asa  tatah  kapinjalah  sam 
abhavat  Jic  struclc  off  his  heads.  Xo/r  that  /rhich  had  been 
Soma-drinJcing,  from  that  arose  the  francoUne  partridge  (SB.) ; 
sa  yadi  na  vindanti  kim  a  driyeran  now  if  they  do  not  find 
it,  why  should  they  mind?  (SB.). 

Sim  is  an  enclitic  particle  restricted  to  the  KV.  Originally 
the  ace.  sing,  of  a  pronoun,  related  to  sa  as  kim  to  ka,  it  is 
generally  used  (much  like  im)  as  an  ace.  of  all  numbers  and 
genders  in  the  third  person — Jii)H,  her,  it,  them,  representing 
a  substantive  (which  sometimes  follows)  and  frequently 
placed  between  a  preposition  and  its  verb,  occasionally  also 
after  a  relative  ;  e.  g.  pari  sim  nayanti  they  lead  him  around 
(i,  95-) ;  pi'a  sim  adityo  asrjat  the  Aditya  made  them  (the 
streams)  to  flow  (ii.  28^) ;  ni  sim  vrtrasya  marmani  vajram 
indro  apipatat  Indra  has  caused  it,  his  holt,  to  fall  on  Vrtra's 
vital  S2)ot  (viii.  100") ;  yam  sim  akrnvan  tamase  viprce, 
tarn  suryam  ichom  they  created  to  disperse  the  darkness,  that 
sun  (iv.  13^). 

It.  sim  sometimeti  giveij  the  relative  tlie  sense  of  ever;  e.g.  yat  sim 
agas  cakrma,  sisrftthas  tat  whatever  sin  ue  have  tommitled,  reimce  thai 
^v.85').   ■ 

su,  su  well,  used  asseveratively  =  thoroughly,  fully,  eerily 
and  always  referring  to  the  verb,  is  almost  restricted  as  an 
independent  particle  to  the  Samhitas,  being  common  in  the 
RV.,  but  rare  in  the  others  ;  e.  g.  jusasva  su  no  adhvaram 
thoroughly  enjoy  our  sacrifice  (iii.  24'-) ;  namah  su  te  homage 
verily  (be)  to  thee  (VS.  xii.  63) ;  jaram  su  gaeha  go  safely  to 
old  age  (AV.  xix.  24''). 


250  INDECLINABLE   WORDS  [180 

(h.  With  preceding  u  the  particle  means  right  well :  ima  u  sti  srudhi 
girah  Uear  these  songs  right  well  (i.  26^) ;  vidmo  &v  asya  mataram  toe 
knoiv/uU  well  his  mother  (AV.  i.  2'). 

b.  With  preceding  ma  it  =  by  no  means,  not  at  all,  never;  e.g.  mo  su 
tva  ,  .  .  asraan  ni  riraman  let  none  by  any  means  keep  thee  from  us 
(vii.  321). 

t.  sii  kam  is  used  like  the  simple  su  except  that  it  appears  with  tlie 
impv.  only  ;  e.g.  tisthata  .  .  .  su  kam  stand  quite  still  (i.  191'^). 

sma,  an  enclitic,  slightly  emphasizing  particle,  has  two 
senses  in  the  RV.  : 

1.  It  generally  emphasizes : 

a.  demonstrative  or  personal  pronouns,  relatives,  or  nouns, 
and  may  be  rendered  by  just,  especially,  or  simply  by  stress  ; 
e.g.  tasya  sma  pravita  bhava  he  his  helper  (i.  12*);  sa 
srudhi  yah  sma  prtanasu  kasu  cit  .  .  .  suraih  svah  sanita 
hear  thou,  who  especially  in  all  battles  with  heroes  dost  win  the 
light  (i.  129"^). 

h.  the  verb,  which  or  (if  it  is  compounded)  the  preposition 
of  which  it  follows  (generally  at  the  beginning  of  the  sen- 
tence) ;  e.  g.  smasi  sma  vayam  esam  tve  are  indeed  theirs 
(i.  87^^) ;  a  sma  ratham  tisthasi  thou  mountest  indeed  iqwn 
thy  car  (i.  51^-).  The  verb  is  in  the  present  ind.  or  the 
impv.,  rarely  the  perf.  ;  it  appears  to  have  been  accented 
before  sma  judging  by  the  only  example  (vi.  44:^**)  in  which 
it  is  not  the  first  word  in  the  sentence  (App,  III,  19  A), 

c.  adverbs  and  particles  ;  e.  g.  uta  sma  and  especially  :  na 
sma  and  ma  sma  by  no  means. 

a.  In  the  AV.  these  emphasizing  uses  are  simihir;  but  in  B.  they 
luive  entirely  disappeared. 

2.  In  a  few  instances  sma  occurs  in  the  RV.  before  pura 
with  the  pres.  ind.  to  express  that  an  action  has  habitually 
taken  place  in  the  past  down  to  the  present  time  ;  e.  g.  ye 
sma  pura  gatuyanti  who  have  alirays  aided  =  irho  aids  now 
and  formerly  did  so  (i.  169''). 

a.  This  use  is  not  found  in  the  AV.,  but  has  become  extremely 
common  in  B.,  where  sma  is  always  preceded  by  ha.     The  meaning 


Ml]     CONJUNCTIVE  AND  ADVBL.  PARTICLES     251 

liere  expressed  is  that  something  habitually  took  place  in  the  past 
i^but  does  not  as  in  the  RV.  include  the  present) ;  e.g.  nd  ha  sma  vai 
pura^agm'r  aparasuvrknam  dahati  formerhj  Agni  ustd  not  fo  biun  what 
K'rts  not  hppcd  off  with  the  axe  ^TS.). 

b.  Much  more  frequently,  however,  pura  is  left  out  and  the 
particles  ha  sma,  from  their  frequent  association  with  it,  assume  its 
meaning  ;  c.  g.  te  ha  sma  yad  deva  asuraii  jdyanti,  tato  ha  sma^_,eva^ 
enan  puuar  upottisthanti  as  often  as  the  gods  defeated  the  Asuras,  the 
latter  ahcai/s  op2)tjsed  them  again  (SB.).  This  use  of  ha  sma  is  very 
common  with  the  jjresent  perfect  aha ;  e.  g.  etdd  dha  sma  va  aha 
naraddh  with  regard  to  this  Ndrada  used  to  sag  (MS.).  Other  tenses  than 
the  present  with  ha  sma  are  found  in  the  AB.  where,  in  two  or 
three  passages,  the  perf.  and  the  impf.  are  used  with  them  in  the 
same  sense. 

svid  is  an  enclitic  particle  emphasizing  the  first  word  of 
a  sentence,  usually  an  interrogative  pronoun  or  adverb. 
Ft  may  generally  be  translated  hy  pray ;  e.  g.  kah  svid  vrks6 
nisthito  madhye  arnasah  irJiiU  tree,  pratj,  teas  that  which 
stood  in  the  midst  of  the  sea?  (i.  182").  In  one  passage  of  the 
RV.  this  particle  gives  the  interrogative  an  indefinite  mean- 
ing:  mata  putrasya  caratah  kva  svit  the  mother  of  the  son 
that  traiiders  irho  litotes  ichcre  (x.  34^").  Very  rarely  (in 
double  questions)  the  particle  appears  without  an  inter- 
rogative :  asti  svin  nii  viryam  tat  ta,  indra,  na  svid  asti : 
tad  rtutha  vi  vocah  is  this  thy  heroic  deed,  0  Indra,  or  is  it 
not :  that  declare  in  due  season  (vi.  18'^). 

a.  In  a  few  instances  svid  apfiears  in  non -interrogative  sentences : 
tvaya  ha  svid  yuja  vayam  abhi  smo  vajasataye  ivUh  thee  as  eompaa,ioii 
we  are  equipped  for  the  Mainmenl  of  hoot  g  (viii.  102^). 

h.  The  employment  of  svid  in  B.  is  similar;  e.g.  kam  u  svid  ato 
'dhi  varam  varisyamahe  nitat  boon,  prag,  begond  this  sitall  we  choose  ? 
(MS.)  ;  tvam  svin  no  brahmistho  'si  art  Ihoa,  prag,  tlie  most  learned  of 
us  ?  (SB.;  ;  ydd  ahgaresu  juhoti  tat  svid  agnau  juhoti  wl/at  he  pours 
on  the  coals,  that  itself  he  pours  on  the  fire  (MS.). 

ha,  an  enclitic  particle  occurring  after  all  words  capable 
of  beginning  a  sentence,  has  a  slightly  emphasizing  and 
asseverative  force.  It  is  probably  identical  in  origin  with 
gha.  but  unlike  that  particle  hardly  ever  (onlj^  twice)  appears 


252  INDECLINABLE  WORDS  [180 

in  the  RV.  with  its  vowel  lengthened.  It  is  common  in  the 
RV.,  occurring  after  personal,  demonstrative,  interrogative, 
and  relative  pronouns,  nouns,  verbs,  verbal  prepositions,  and 
adverbs. 

a.  In  B.  the  use  of  this  particle  varies  in  frequency:  it  is  com- 
paratively rare  in  the  TS.,  where  it  generally  appears  with  sma  or 
with  perfects;  while  in  the  iSB.  it  is  extremely  frequent.  It  lays 
stress  on  the  first  word  of  sentences  so  as  to  emphasize  the  connexion 
or  to  mark  a  new  or  important  step  in  the  narrative;  e.g.  iti 
marimrjyeta  :  ajarasam  ha  caksusman  bhavati  ya  evam  veda  ivitli. 
these  ivords  he  should  loipe  (his  eyes)  :  so  till  old  age  he  ivho  knows  this  becomes 
possessed  of  vision  (AB.). 

b.  It  is  very  often  used  after  the  first  word  of  a  story  with  or 
without  v^i.  It  apjjears  predominantly  with  the  perfect  in  those 
parts  of  the  SB.  and  the  AB.  that  narrate  with  the  perfect,  mostly 
with  verbs  of  speaking.  Thus  sa  ha^uvaca  appeai-s  here,  while  so 
"bravit  is  said  elsewhere. 

hanta  occurs  three  times  in  the  RV.  as  an  interjection  in 

exhortations  ;  e.  g.  yajamahai  yajniyan  hanta  devan  votne, 

we  mil  worship  the  adorable  gods  (x.  53-). 

«.  It  is  similarly  used  in  B.  :   hanta>^imam  yajnam  sambharama 

well,  we  ivitl xtrepare  the  sacrifice  (AB.). 

hi,  in  origin  probably  an  emphasizing  particle,  is  used 
throughout  as  a  subordinating  conjunction  Avhich  regularly 
throws  the  accent  on  the  verb.  It  nearly  always  follows 
the  first  word  of  the  sentence,  or  the  second  when  the  first 
two  are  closely  connected.     In  V.  it  is  used  in  two  ways : 

1 .  in  indicative  sentences  (the  verb  having  sometimes  to 
be  supplied)  to  express  the  reason  (like  yap),  meaning  either 
for,  if  the  clause  containing  it  follows,  or  became,  since,  if  it 
precedes ;  e.  g.  balam  dhehi  tanusu  no,  tvam  hi  balada 
asi  bestow  strength  on  our  bodies,  for  thou  art  a  gicer  of  strength 
(iii.  53^*) ;  srustivano  hi  dasiise  devas,  tan  a  vaha  since 
the  gods  give  car  to  the  pious  man,  bring  them  hither  (i.  45-j. 

2.  in  exhortative  sentences,  mostly  with  the  impv.,  as  an 
emphatic  particle  =  jjm?/,  indeed;  e.g.  yuksva  hi  kesina 
hari  pi'uu  harness  thy  two  Img-maned  bag  steeds  (i.  lO''). 


180-181]  PARTICLES.     INTERJECTIONS  253 

((.  In  B.  throe  uses  ol' hi  may  be  distinguished  : 

1.  it  expresses  the  reason,  as  in  the  first  use  in  V.,  only  that  the 
clause  containing  hi  always  follows  {  =  for  only),  and  the  verb  is 
much  oftener  omitted  than  expressed  ;  e.  g.  t£d  indro  'mucyata,  dev6 
hf  s&h  from  ihat  Indra  freed  himself,  for  he  (is)  a  god  (i^B.).  The  particle 
vdi  is  often  added  to  strengthen  hi  ;  e.g.  vdjro  hi  va  apah /or  wafer  I's 
indeed  a  thuvderboH  (SB,). 

2.  it  is  sometimes  employed  to  emphasize  an  interrogative  =  pray  ; 
e.  g.  kathdm  hi  karisyfisi  how,  pray,  wilt  thou  do  it  ?  (SB.). 

.3.  it  expresses  assent  in  answers  after  a  word  repeated  from 
a  pi'eceding  question  ;  e.  g.  tfim  eva  tv^m  pasyasi^iti ;  t^m  hi  '  do  you 
see  hivi?'  Yes,  (I  see)  him  (SB.). 

a.  In  B.,  when  hi  appeal's  in  the  relative  clause  of  a  period  explain- 
ing a  previous  statement,  the  verb  of  the  principal  clause  (to  which  hi 
properly  applies)  is  sometimes  irregularly  unaccented;  e.g.  iddm 
hi  yada  vfirsaty  ^tha^osadhayo  jayante  for.  ivhen  if  rains  here,  then  the 
phmts  .spring  vp  (SB.), 

181.  A  certain  number  of  words  having  the  nature  of 
interjections  occur  in  the  Samhitas.  They  are  of  two  kinds, 
l^eing  either  exclamations  or  imitative  sounds. 

a.  The  exclamations  are:  bat  (RV.)  truly,  bata  (RV.) 
alas !  hanta  come,  used  exhortatively  with  the  subjunctive 
and  hay6  come  before  vocatives ;  hiruk  and  huruk  (RV.) 
^^«-a^.'  hai  (AV.)  7/0.' 

1).  Interjections  of  the  onon^.atopoetic  type  are  :  kikira 
(RV.)  used  with  kr  =  make  the  sound  kikira  =  tear  to  tatters  ; 
kikkita  (TS.)  used  in  invocations  ;  cisca  (RV.)  loMz !  (of  an 
arrow),  used  with  kr  mal'e  a  ichkzmg  sound ;  phat  (AV.,  VS.) 
crash!  phal  (AV.)  splash!  bal  (AV.)  dash!  bhuk  (AV.) 
hang !  sdl  (AV.)  clap ! 


CHAPTER   VI 

NOMINAL  STEM  FORMATION  AND  COMPOUNDS 
A.    Nominal  Stems. 

182.  Declinable  stems,  though  they  often  consist  of  the 
bare  root  (either  verbal  or  pronominal),  are  chiefly  formed  by 
means  of  suffixes  added  to  roots.  These  suffixes  are  of  two 
kinds:  primary,  or  those  added  directly  to  roots  (which 
may  at  the  same  time  be  compounded  with  verbal  prefixes) ; 
and  secondary,  or  those  added  to  stems  already  ending  in 
a  suffix  and  to  pronominal  roots  (which  ai"e  thus  treated  as 
primary  stems). 

1.  Primary  Derivatives  as  a  rule  show  the  root  in  its 
strong  form  ;  e.  g.  v6d.-a  m.  hioivledge  (vid  Icnow) ;  sdr-ana 
n.  running  (\/sr);  kar-a  making  (%/kr);  grabh-a  m.  sei;?er 
(^grabh).  In  meaning  they  may  be  divided  into  the  two 
classes  of  abstract  action  nouns  (cognate  in  sense  to  infinitives) 
and  concrete  agent  nouns  (cognate  in  sense  to  participles) 
used  as  adjectives  or  substantives  ;  e.  g.  ma-ti  f.  thought 
(man  think) ;  yodh-a,  m.fyhter{judh.  fight).  Other  meanings 
are  only  modifications  of  these  two  ;  e.  g.  dana  ( =  da^ana) 
n.  act  of  giving,  then  gift. 

a.  When  the  bare  root  is  used  as  a  declinable  stem,  it 
usually  remains  unchanged  ;  e.  g.  da  m.  giver,  bhid  f. 
destroyer,  yuj  m.  companion,  spas  m.  spy,  vrdh  adj.  strengthen- 
ing. Roots  ending  in  i  or  u  take  a  determinative  t ;  e.  g. 
mi-t  f.  pillar,  stu-t  f.  praise.  The  root  may  appear  in  a 
reduplicated  form  ;  e.  g.  cikit  wise,  j6-gu  singing  aloud. 

b.  Several  primary  nominal  suffixes  connected  with  the 
verbal  system  have  already  been  sufficiently  dealt  with,  viz. 
those  of  the  pres.  and  fnt.  participles :  ant  (85  ;  156),  ana 


J82]  PRIMAEY   NOMINAL   STEMS  255 

and  mana  (158)  ;  of  the  perf.  act.  part. :  vams  (89  ;  157) ; 
of  the  perf.  pass.  part.  :  ta  and  na  (160) ;  of  the  gerundive: 
ya,  ayya,  enya,  tva,  tavya  '  and  aniya"  (162).  The  forma- 
tion of  stems  to  which  the  primary  suffixes  of  the  com- 
parative and  superlative,  iyams  and  istha,  are  added  has 
also  been  explained  (88  ;  103,  2).  Of  the  rest  the  following 
in  alphabetical  order  are  the  most  usual  and  important : 

a:  e.g.  bhag-a  m.  share  (^/bhaj) ;  megh-a  ra.  cloud  (mih 
discharge  water);  cod-a  m.  instigator  (\''cud) ;  sarg-a  m. 
emission  (/srj);  nay-a  m.  leader  (\^ni),  priy-a  pleasing 
(/pri);  hav-a  m.  invocation  (\/hu);  jar-a  m.  lover  (v^jr); 
ve-vij-a  quicJc  (vij  dart),  csira,-cav-Q,  far-extending.  The  sub- 
stantives are  almost  exclusively  m.  ;  but  yug-a  n.  (Grk. 
^vy-6-u ;  Lat.  jug-n-m). 

an  :  m.  a^ent  nouns  and  about  a  dozen  defective  n.  stems  ; 

e.  g.  uks-an  m.  ox,  miirdh-an  m.  head,  raj-an  m.  hing ; 
as-an  n.  hlood,  ah-an  n.  dati,  ud-an  n.  water,  iidh-an 
n.  bidder. 

ana:  n.  action  nouns:  bhoj-ana  n.  enjoyment  (v^bhuj), 
sad-ana  n.  seat  {\^83id);  kar-ana  n.  f?ea?(/kr);  hav-ana  n. 
invocation  (\^hu);  bhuv-ana  n.  being  (\/bhu),  vrj-ana  n. 
enclosure ;  also  m.  agent  nouns :  e.  g.  kar-ana  active,  mad- 
ana  gladdening  (\^mad),  sam-gam-ana  assemhling  ;  tur-ana 
speeding. 

ana :  f.  action  nouns :  jar-ana  old  age,  yos-ana  woman, 
vadh-ana  slaughter.  This  is  also  the  f.  form  of  adjectives  in 
ana  ;  e.  g.  tur-ana  speeding. 

ani :  f.  action  nouns,  and  m.  f.  agent  nouns  ;  e.  g.  ar-ani 

f.  fire-sticli,  vart-ani  f.  trach ;  cars-ani  active ;  ruruks-dni 
tcilUng  to  destroy  (from  des.  stem  of  ruj  destroy). 

1  Tlie  second  part,  ya,  of  this  suffix  is  secondary  (182,  2),  but  the 
whole  is  employed  as  a  primary  suffix  (162,  6).  The  first  pai't,  tav,  is 
probably  derived  from  the  old  infinitive  ending  tave  (p.  192,  4). 

-  The  second  half  of  this  suffix,  iya,  is  secondary,  but  the  whole  fs 
t-mployed  as  a  primary  suffix  (162.  6). 


256  NOMINAL  STEM  FORMATION  [is2 

as :  n.  action  nouns  (with  accented  root)  and  agent  nouns 
(with  accented  suffix) ;  e,  g.  ap-as  n.  worlv  (Lat.  op-us),  ap-as 
active ;  raks-as  n.  demon,  raks-as  m.  id. 

a :  f.  action  nouns  (from  roots  and  secondary  conjugation 
stems) ;  e.  g.  nind-a  blame  ;  ji-gl-s-a  desire  to  win  ;  gam-ay-a 
causinc/  to  go  ;  asva-y-a  desire  for  horses. 

i  :  action  nouns  (nearly  always  f.) ;  iigent  nouns  (adj.  and 
subst.) ;  and  a  few  neuters  of  obscure  origin  ;  e.  g.  krs-i  f. 
tillage,  aj-i  m.  f.  contest;  cakr-i  active  (/kr),  suc-i  bright; 
pan-i  m.  hand;  aks-i  n.  eye,  asth-i  n.  bone,  dadh-i  n.  sour 
milTc. 

is :  n.  action  nouns  (mostly  with  concrete  sense) ;  e.  g. 
avc-ia  flame,  jjdt-is  light,  am-is  rair  flesh,  havh-is  straw, 

u:  agent  nouns,  adj.  and  subst.  (mostly  m.,  but  several 
f.  and  n.) ;  e.  g.  tan-ii  thin  (Lat.  ten-u-i-s) ;  bah-u  m.  arm 
(Gk.  TTTJ-^-v-?),  pad-ii  m.  foot ;  han-u  f.  jair ;  jan-u  n.  hiee 
(Gk.  yov-v). 

una:  adj.  and  m.  n.  subst.  ;  e.g.  tar-una  ^/oirn^,  dhar-una 
supporting,  m.  n.  support,  rait'h'UXidi  forming  a  pair,  m.  couple  ; 
var-una  m.  a  god,  sak-una  m.  bird. 

us :  n.  action  nouns  and  m.  agent  nouns ;  e.  g.  dhan-us 
n.  boiv ;  jay-us  victorious ;  van-tis  m.  assailant. 

u  :  f.,  mostly  corresponding  to  m.  and  n.  in  u  ;  e.  g.  tan-u 
bod]i ;  dhan-u  sandbanA'  (n.  dhan-u) ;  independently  formed  : 
cam-u  dish,  vadh-u  bride. 

ka  (rare  as  a  primary,  but  very  common  as  a  secondary 
suffix) :  adj.  and  m.  subst. :  sus-ka  dry ;  at-ka  m.  garment, 
sl(3-ka  m.  call,  sto-ka  m.  drop  ;  vrsc-i-ka  m.  scorpion. 

ta :  besides  ordinarily  forming  perf.  pass,  participles, 
appears,  in  a  more  general  sense,  as  the  suffix  of  a  few 
adjectives  and  of  substantives  with  concrete  meaning ;  e.  g. 
trs-ta  rough,  si-ta  cold ;  du-ta  m.  messenger,  gax'-ta  m. 
car-scat,  mar-ta  m.  mortal,  has-ta  m.  liand ;  ghr-ta  n.  ghee, 
nak-ta  n.  night ;  with  connecting  i :  as-i-ta  blacl;  pal-i-td 
grey,  r6h-i-ta  red. 


132]  PRIMARY   NOMINAL   STEMS  257 

li :  cliiefly  f.  .iction  nouns ;  e.  g.  is-ti  (h'sire,  u-ti  aid 
(v'^av),  kir-ti  praise  (kr  commemorate),  ra-ti  gift;  is-ti 
offering,  ga-ti  motion,  da-ti^  gift;  didhi-ti  devotion  (dhi 
thinlx)  ;  amh-a-ti  distress,  am-a-ti  indigence.  It  also  forms 
some  twenty  agent  nouns  used  either  as  adjectives  or  as 
m.  substantives;  e.g.  ra-ti  ivilling  to  give,  vas-ti  eager; 
jna-ti  m,  relative,  dr-ti  m.  ^7i-/m,  dhu-ti  m.  shaker,  mus-ti 
m.  fist,  sap-ti  m.  steed,  abhi-sti  m.  helxjer  (but  abhi-sti 
f.  help) ;  am-a-ti  ])oor,  ar-a-ti  m.  servant,  vrk-a-ti  m. 
murderer. 

tu  :  chiefly  forms  the  stem  of  dat.,  abl.-gen.,  and  ace. 
infinitives;  e.g.  da-tii :  D.  da-tave  and  datavai ;  Ab.G. 
da-tos ;  A.  da-tum  ;  also  a  few  independent  action  nouns 
and  still  fewer  agent  nouns  ;  6-tu  m.  ireft  (va  iveave),  tan-tu 
m,  thread ;  ak-tii  m.  ray  (anj  anoint),  r-tu  m.  season,  jan-tii 
m.  creature;  vas-tu  f.  morning  (vas  shine);  vas-tu  n.  ahode 
(vas  direll :  Gk.  acr-Tv). 

tr :  agent  nouns,  often  used  participially  governing  an  ace. 
(when  the  root  is  generally  accented) ;  e.  g.  gan-tr  going  to 
(ace),  but  kai'-tr  m.  doer,  yas-tr  sacrifieer  (^yaj),  us-tr 
ploughing  hull ;  less  commonly  with  connecting  vowel  : 
cod-i-tr  instigator,  sav-i-tr  stimulator  ;  a-mar-i-tr  destroijer ; 
tar-u-tr  trinning,  tar-u-trm.  compieror  ;  wdiY-u-tv  protector; 
man-6-tr  and  man-o-tr  inventor.  This  suffix  also  forms 
several  names  of  relationship  ;  e.  g.  pi-tr  m.  father,  ma-tr 
f.  mother  (101). 

tnu  forms  more  than  a  dozen  agent  nouns,  mostly  adj.  ; 
e.  g.  kr-tnu  active  ;  piy-a-tnii  reviling ;  maday-i-tnu  intoxi- 
cating, stanay-i-tnu  m.  thunder. 

tra :  agent  nouns,  a  few  of  them  adjectives,  the  rest  nearly 
all  n.  substantives,   expressing  the  instrument  or  means ; 


1  This  word  when  the  final  number  rif  a  compound  is  reduced  hy 
syncope  to  tti  :  bhdga-tti  f.  ijiJI  offniivnc,  magha-tti  f.  receij)!  of  hmmli', 
v^su-tti  f.  receipt  of  )ceallli. 

1819  S 


258  NOMINAL   STEM   FORMATION  [182 

e.g.  jai-tra  victorious,  yaj-a-tra  adorahje;  kse-tra  n.  field, 
pa-tra  n.  cup,  vas-tra  n.  garment ;  khan-i-tra  n.  slwvel. 
There  are  also  a  few  masculines,  as  ddms-tia  tusk  (dams 
hite),  mdn-tra  prcujer,  mi-tra  friend  (but  n.  friendshiii). 

tra :  occurs  a  few  times  as  the  f.  form  of  the  preceding : 
as-tra  goad  (as  reach),  ma-tra  measure  (Gk.  /j.e-Tpo-u). 

tha  :  action  nouns,  more  often  ni.  than  n. ;  e.g.  ga-tha  m. 
song,  bhr-tha  m.  ofcring,  ra-tha  m.  car,  ha-tha,  m.  slaughter ; 
ar-tha'  n.  goal,  uk-tha  n.  saying  (\/vac),  tir-tha  n.  ford 
(\/tf  cross),  I'ik-tha  n.  inheritance  (\/ric);  with  connecting 
vowel :  uc-a-tha  n.  praise,  stav-a-tha  m.  praise. 

tha  :  occurs  a  few  times  as  the  f.  form  of  tha :  kas-tha 
course,  ga-tha  song,  ni-tha  tridc. 

na :  besides  ordinarily  forming  perf.  pass,  participles 
(160,  1)  appears  as  the  suffix  of  a  number  of  adjectives  (f.  na) 
and  substantives,  the  latter  mostly  m.,  a  few  n.  ;  e.  g.  us-na 
hot,  krs-na  htacl;  nag-na  n(d;€d ;  budh-na  m.  t)ottom,  yaj-fia 
m.  sacrifice,  var-na  m.  colour;  par-na  n.  wing,  vas-na  n. price- 

na  :  as  the  f.  form  of  na  makes  a  few  substantives  :  trs-na 
tJdrst,  dh6-na  cou\  s6-na  missile,  sthu-na  i:)0st. 

ni :  m.  and  f.  action  and  agent  nouns  (some  of  the  latter 
adj.) :  yo-ni  m.  receptacle,  jur-ni  f.  heat ;  pfs-ni  spjcchled, 
pre-ni  loving  (\/pra),  bhur-ni  excited;  ag-ni  m.  fire,  vah-ni 
m.  draught  animal. 

nu :  action  and  agent  nouns  (including  some  adjectives), 
nearly  always  m.  ;  e.  g.  ksep-nii  m.  jerl;  bha-nii  m.  light, 
su-nu  m.  son ;  dhe-nu  f.  cow ;  da-nu  n.  drop  (m.  f.  demon). 

ma:  adj.  and  (almost  exclusively  m.)  substantives;  e.g. 
jih-raa  ohlique,  ^ag-ma  mighty ;  idh-ma  m.  fuel,  ghar-ma 
ni.  heat,  sto-ma  m.  praise,  hi-ma  m.  cold ;  bil-ma  n.  chip ; 
hi-ma  f.  winter. 

man  :  action  nouns  (very  numerous),  most  of  which  are  n. 


^  firtha  occars  often  in  the  RV. ,  but  appears  only  three  times  (in 
Mandala  X)  as  a  m.;  in  tlie  later  language  it  is  m.  only. 


18-2]  PRIMARY   NOMINAL   STEMS  259 

accented  on  the  root,  while  a,  good  many  are  m.  accented  on 
the  suffix ;  e.  g.  aj-man  n.  course  (Lat.  ag-men),  na-man 
n.  name  (Lat.  no-mcn),  bhu-man  n.  world,  sas-man  n.  praise 
(Lat.  car-men) ;  jan-i-man  n.  hirtli ;  var-i-man  n,  expanse ; 
bhu-man  m.  abundance,  vid-man  m.  Inotvledge,  prath-i-man 
m.  breadth  ;  also  a  few  rarely  used  m.  agent  nouns,  mostly 
accented  on  the  suffix  ;  e.  g.  vad-man  m.  speaker,  sad-man 
m.  sitter;  as-man  m.  stone  (Gk.  dK-jxoov) ;  36-man  victorious', 
some  of  these  differ  in  accent  only  from  corresponding  n. 
action  nouns  (cp.  as):  da-man  m.  gioer:  da-man  n.  gift; 
dhar-man  m.  ordainer:  dhar-man  n.  ordinance;  brah-man 
m.  priest :  brah-man  n.  irorship ;  sad-man  m.  sitter :  sad- 
man  n.  seat. 

mi :  adj.  and  m.  (also  one  f.)  subst. :  ja-mi  related ;  iir- 
mi  m.  wave,  ras-mi  m.  ray ;  bhu-mi  f.  eartli. 

mi :  a  few  f.  substantives :  bhu-mi  earth,  laks-mi  sign, 
siir-mi  tutie. 

yu  :  a  few  adjectives  and  m.  substantives :  yaj-yu  pious, 
sundh-yu  pure,  sah-yu  strong ;  man-yu  m.  anger,  mrt- 
yu  m.  deatli ;  das-yu  m.  enemy,  sim-yu  m.  enemy. 

ra :  many  adjectives,  mostly  accented  on  the  suffix  ;  e.  g. 
ug-ra  mighty,  ■pat-a.-ra,  flying,  aj-l-ra  sn-ift;  grdh-ra  greedy; 
vip-ra  inspAred  ;  also  several  substantives  of  different  genders 
(f.  ra) ;  e.  g.  ksu-ra  m.  razor,  vam-ra  m.  ant ;  khad-i-ra  ni. 
a  tree;  aj-ra  m.  field  (Gk.  dy-po-s),  vaj-ra  ra.  thunderbolt, 
sH-ra  m.  hero  ;  abh-ra  n,  cloud,  ksi-ra  n.  milk  ;  ag-ra  n. 
point,  randh-ra  n.  hollow  ;  sar-i-ra  n.  body  ;  dha-ra  f.  stream, 
sii-ra  f.  intoxicating  liquor. 

ri :  adj.  and  m.  f.  subst. ;  e.  g.  bhu-ri  abundant,  vadh-ri 
emascidated  ;  jas-u-ri  exhausted ;  angh-ri  m.  foot,  su-ri  m. 
patron ;  as-ri  f.  edge,  us-ri  f.  dawn  ;  ang-ii-ri  f.  finger. 

ru :  adj.  and  a  few  n.  substantives :  ca-ru  dear  (Lat. 
ea-ru-s),  hhl-rxi  timid  ;  pat-a-ru  ,/?7//m/ ;  vand-a-ru  jt>mism// ; 
san-e-ru  otitaining;  as-ru  n.  tear,  smas-ru  n.  Ijeard. 

va :   adj.    and   (mostly  m.)  substantives;    e.g.    urdh-va 

s2 


200  NOMINAL   STEM    FOEMATION  [182 

(Gk.  opO-o-s:),  pak-va  ripe,  i£>nY-va,  prccedinf/,  sar-va  all  (Lat. 
sal-ru-s);  as-va  m,  Jiorse  (Lat.  eq-tm-s),  sru-va  m.  ladle;  am-i- 
va  f.  disease. 

van:  adj.  and  subst.  (mostly  m.,  few  n.) ;  e.g.  rk-van 
j^raising,  krt-van  active,  yaj-van  sacrificing ;  adh-van  m. 
road,  gra-van  m.  stone  ;  par-van  n.  joint. 

sa :  adj.  and  subst.  (all  genders) ;  e.  g.  grt-sa  adroit. 
prk-sa  dappled  (s/prc);  mah-i-sa  mightii ;  rj-i-sa  rushing; 
ar-u-sa  red;  lit-sa  m.  fountain,  drap-sa  m.  dro}!,  puru-sa 
m.  man  ;  piir-i-sa  u.  rul/ldsh  ;  man-i-sa  f.  devotion. 

snu  :  adj.  (from  root  or  cans,  stem) ;  e.  g.  ji-snii  victorious  ; 
vadh-a-snil  murderous ;  car-i-snii  wandering  ;  maday-i-snu 
mtoxicating. 

2.  Secondary  nominal  Suffixes. 

The  great  majority  of  these  form  adjectives  with  the 
general  sense  of  relating  to  or  connected  with. 

a :  forms  a  large  number  of  adjectives  expressing  the 
sense  of  relation  to  or  connexion  with  the  primitive  word  ; 
many  of  them  have  in  the  m.  become  apjjellatives  and  in 
the  n.  abstract  nouns.  The  first  syllable  in  the  great 
majority  of  instances  is  strengthened  with  Vrddhi  (the  f. 
then  always  takes  i)  ;  e.  g.  marut-a  relating  to  the  Maruts 
(mariit) ;  daiva  divine  (deva  god);  parthiva  eartldij  (prthiv-i 
earth) ;  manav-a  hclonging  to  man  (man-u),  m.  human  being  ; 
tanv-a  helonging  to  the  body  (tanu) ;  dasarajn-a  n.  battle  of 
the  ten  Icings  (dasa-rajan) ;  maghon-a  n.  bounti fulness  (magha- 
van  bountiful) ;  without  Vrddhi :  bhesaj-a  adj.  healing,  n. 
medicine;  sakhy-a  n.  friendsliip  [saikhi  friend);  hotv-an.  office 
of  priest  (hotr). 

a  :  forms  the  f.  of  adjectives  which  in  m.  and  n.  end  in  a  : 
e.  g.  nava  f.,  nava  m.  n.  neiv ;  priy-a  f..  pi'iy-a  m.  n.  dear ; 
gata  f.,  gata  m.  n.  gone. 

ani  :  forms  the  f.  of  names  of  male  beings  in  a,  or  f. 
personifications  ;  e.  g.  indr-ani  wife  of  Indra,  mudgal-ani 


182J  SECONDARY   NOMINAL   SUFFIXES  261 

wife  of  MuclgaUi ;  arany-ani  itympli  of  tite  Forcd  (aranya) ; 
urj-ani  Slrength  (urj  afrcngtli). 

ayana :  forms  m.  patronymics  with  initial  Vi  ddiii ;  e.g. 
kanv-ayana  descendant  of  Kanva. 

i :  forms  in.  patronymics,  witli  initial  Vrddhi,  from 
nouns  in  a ;  e.  g.  paurukuts-i  descendant  of  I'uruJcutsa  ; 
samvaran-i  descendant  of  Samcavana.  Similarly  formed  is 
sarath-i  m.  charioteer  (from  sa-i'atha  dr'wimj  on  the  same 
chanot). 

in  :  forms  numerous  adjectives,  in  the  sense  of  possessing/, 
almost  exclusively  from  stems  in  a  ;  e.  g.  ark-in  praising 
(ar-kajjra/se);  from  other  stems:  arc-in  radiant  {•axc-iheam), 
var-m-in  clad  In  armour  (var-man)  ;  irregularly  formed : 
ret-in  abounding  in  seed  (r6t-as),  hiran-in  adorned  -with  gold 
(hiran-ya). 

iya  {=  ya  after  conjunct  consonants):  forms  adjectives  of 
relation ;  e.  g.  abhr-iya  derlred  from  the  clouds  (abhra), 
indr-iya  belonging  to  Indra,  samudr-iya  oceanic. 

i  :  forms  the  f.  of  m.  stems  made  with  suffixes  ending  in 
consonants  (95),  or  with  tr  (101  e),  and  often  of  stems  in  u 
(98  <j  or  in  a  (always  when  formed  with  Vrddhi) ;  e.  g. 
ad-at-i  eating,  av-i-tr-i  protectress,  prthv-i  broad  (prthu), 
dev-i  goddess  (dev-a).     Cp.  107. 

ina :  forms  adjectives,  chiefly  expressive  of  direction, 
from  the  weak  stem  of  derivatives  in  anc ;  e.  g.  arvac-ina 
turned  towards  (arvanc  hitherward) ;  also  others  expressing 
the  general  sense  of  relation  ;  e.  g.  visvajan-ina  (AV.)  con- 
taining all  kinds  of  people. 

iya :  forms  general  adjectives,  chiefly  in  the  later  Samhitas  ; 
e.g.  grhamedh-iya  relating  to  the  domestic  sacrifice,  parvat- 
iya  mountainous ;  ahavan-iya  used  for  the  o?>?afi'ow(a-havana), 
as  a  m.  sacrificial  fire  (AV.). 

eya :  forms  m.  patronymics  as  well  as  a  few  general 
adjectives;  e.g.  adit-eya  m.  son  of  Adit  I ;  paurus-eya 
relating  to  man  (piirusa). 


262  NOMINAL   STEM   FORMATION  [is-i 

ka :  forms  adjectives  and  diminutives  :  e.  g.  anta-ka 
making  an  end  (data),  dura-ka  distant,  mama-ka  mu  ;  pada- 
ka  in  little  foot,  raja-ka  m.  Icinglet ;  with  Vrddhi  and  con- 
necting i  :  vasant-i-ka  belonging  to  the  spring  (vasanta).  The 
f.  of  some  of  the  diminutives  is  formed  with  ika  ;  e.  g. 
kumar-ika  f.  little  girl  (kumara-ka  m.  little  hog). 

tana  and  (its  syncopated  form)  tna :  form  adjectives  with 
a  temporal  sense  from  adverbs  and  prepositions ;  e.  g. 
nu-tana  and  nu-tna  present  (nu  now) ;  sana-taua  and 
sana-tna  eternal  (sana  from  of  old) ;  pra-tna  ancient  (pra 
hefore). 

tama :  forms  superlatives  (from  nominal  stems  and  the 
prep,  lid)  and  ordinals  ;  e.  g.  puru-tama  very  many ;  ut-tama 
highest ;  sata-tama  hundredth. 

tara :  forms  comi^aratives  from  adjectives,  substantives, 
and  the  prep,  aid :  tavas-tara  stronger ;  rathi-tara  better 
charioteer]  lit-tara  higher. 

ta  :  forms  abstract  f.  substantives  Avith  the  sense  conveyed 
by  the  English  suffixes  -ship  and  -ness;  e.g.  bandhu-ta 
relationship,  vasu-ta  icealthiness ;  deva-ta  divinity,  purusa- 
ta  human  nature. 

tati  and  (less  often)  tat:  form  abstract  f.  substantives 
(like  ta) ;  e.  g.  jyestha-tati  superiority,  sarva-tati  complete 
welfare  (Lat.  salu-tati-) ;  deva-tat  divine  service,  sarva-tat 
completeness  (Lat.  salu-tcd-), 

tya  :  forms  a  few  substantives  and  adjectives  from  adverbs 
and  prepositions :  ama-tyam.  companion  (ama  at  home);  apa- 
tya  n.  offspring;  ni-tya  constant,  nis-ty a,  foreign  (nis  out). 

tva  :  forms  n.  abstract  substantives  (like  ta) ;  e.  g.  amrta- 
tva  n.  immortality,  maghavat-tva  liherality. 

tvana  (=  tva-na):  forms  n.  abstract  substantives  (nearly 
all  of  tliem  duplicates  of  others  in  tva) ;  e.  g.  jani-tvana 
wifehood,  sakhi-tvana  friendship. 

tha :  forms  a  few  ordinals  as  well  as  adjectives  (from 
pronominal  stems)  with  a  general  numerical  sense  ;    e.  g. 


I 


182]  HECONDAKY   NOMINAL   SUFFIXES  26y 

catur-tha  fourth,    sapta-tha    seventh ;    kati-tha    the    how- 
inanieth  ? 

ni  :  forms  the  f.  of  pati  lord  and  of  parusa  knotty,  as  well 
as  of  several  adjectives  in  ta  denoting  colours  ;  thus  pat-ni 
mistress[G\s..  woT-via),  parus-ni  a  river  ;  6-ni  variegated  (6-ta). 
In  a  few  of  the  colour  adjectives  ni  is  substituted  for  the 
linal  a,  wliile  k  takes  the  place  of  t ;  e.  g.  asik-ni  hlack 
(as-i-ta). 

bha :  forms  m.  names  of  animals ;  thus  rsa-bha  and 
vrsa-bha  bull ;  garda-bha  and  rasa-bha  ass. 

ma :  forms  superlatives  (partly  from  prepositions)  and 
a  few  ordinals ;  e.  g.  ava-ma  lotvesi ;  madhya-ma  middle- 
most; nava-ma  ninth  (Lat.  novi-mu-s),  dasa-ma  tenth  (Lat. 
deci-mu-s). 

mant :  forms  adjectives  in  the  sense  of  2^ossessi/ig  from 
substantives  (except  stems  in  a)  ;  e.  g.  asani-msint  possessing 
the  thimderhoU,  ^vatvL-mamt  powerful ;  go-mant  rich  in  cows, 
caksus-mant  ^MssessecZ  of  eyes. 

maya  :  forms  adjectives  (f.  i)  in  the  sense  of  consisting  of; 
e.  g.  manas-maya  spiritual,  mrn-maya  made  of  clay  (mrd). 

mna :  forms  a  few  n.  abstracts  from  nouns  or  particles : 
dyu-mna  brightness,  su-mna  welfare. 

ya  :  forms  adjectives  of  relation,  m.  patronymics  and  n. 
abstracts.  Most  of  the  latter  two  classes  take  Vrddhi  of  the 
first  syllable,  but  only  about  one-fourth  of  the  adjectives  do 
so  ;  e.  g.  pasav-ya  relating  to  cattle  (pasii) ;  aditya  m,  son  of 
Aditi ;  taugrya  m.  son  ofTugra,  but  also  tiigr-ya  ;  adhipa- 
tya  n.  lordship  (adhipati  overlord). 

ra  :  forms  comparatives  (from  prepositions)  and  ordinary 
nouns,  mostly  adjectives ;  e,  g.  ava-ra  lower ;  dhum-ra  grey 
(dhuma  smoke) ;  rath-i-ra  riding  in  a  car  (ratha). 

la :  forms  adjectives  and  a  few  m.  diminutives ;  e.  g. 
'k.di^i-ldi{moyikey-coloured=)  brown,  hahu-la  abundant ;  vrsa-la 
m.  little  man,  sisu-la  m.  little  child. 

vat :  forms  a  few  f.  abstract  substantives,  almost  cxclu- 


264  NOMINAL   STEM   FORMATION  [182-183 

sively    from   prepositions,    expressing   local   position ;    e.  g. 
ud-vat  hchjld.  ni-vat  deptli. 

van  :  forms  adjectives  in  the  sense  oi  possessing  and  a  few 
m.  substantives ;  e.  g.  magha-van  houiififul,  srusti-van 
obedient,  samad-van  u-arUlcc;  athar-van  m.  fire-priest. 

vant :  forms  adjectives,  from  every  kind  of  nominal  stem, 
in  the  sense  of  possessing ;  e.  g.  as va- vant  and  asva-vant 
owning  horses  :  sakhi-vant  having  friends ;  visnu-vant  accom- 
panied hg  Vhnu  ;  roman-vant  hairg  ;  payas-vant  containing 
milli.  Some  of  these  derivatives,  especially  those  formed  from 
pronominal  stems,  have  the  sense  of  resemhUng ;  e.  g. 
ma-vant  lile  me  ;  nr-vant  manly.  From  this  sense  is  derived 
the  use  of  the  n.  ace.  as  an  adv.  of  comparison  ;  e.  g.  manus- 
vat  like  3Ianus. 

vin  :  forms  adjectives  from  stems  ending  in  a  (which  is 
lengthened),  a,  and  as  ;  e.  g.  ubhaya-vin  iKirtal^ing  of  both 
(ubhaya),  astra-vin  obedient  to  the  goad,  yasas-vin  glorious. 
Exceptionally  formed  are  dhrsad-vin  bold  (dhrsat)  and 
vag-vin  eloquent  (vac). 

sa :  forms  adjectives  and  m.  substantives,  sometimes 
without  change  of  meaning  ;  e.  g.  eta-sa  variegated  (eta  id.), 
yuva-sa  youthful  (yiivan  id.),  roma-sa  hairy  (roman  hair) ; 
anku-sa  m.  Itool:,  kala-sa  m.  jar. 

183.  The  above  lists  of  suffixes  practically  supply  the 
rules  of  gender  for  the  Vedic  noun.  These  may  be 
summarized  as  follows : 

Speaking  generally,  bare  roots  as  stems,  if  action  nouns, 
are  f.,  if  agent  nouns,  m. 

Derivative  stems  in  a,  i,  u  are  f. ;  stems  in  a,  t,  n  may  be 
m.  or  n. ;  stems  in  i  and  u  may  be  of  any  gender. 

a.  Feminine  are  all  stems  formed  with  the  suffixes  a,  i,^ 
U ;  ta,  tat,  tati,  ti,^  tra. 

^  Except  seven  m.  stems  in  i  :  see  100,  I  h. 

■  But  when  stems  in  ti  appear  as  agent  nouns  they  aiv  m.,  and 
m.  f.  as  adjectives. 


]S:J-184]  GENDEK.     COMPOUNDS  I'Bo 

h.  Neuter  are  all  stems  formed  ^\•itll  is,  tva,  tvana,  aiul, 
unless  adjectives^  or  agent  nouns,'  those  formed  with  ana, 
as,  us. 

c.  Masculine  are  (in  so  far  as  not  used  adjectivally)  all 
stems  formed  with  the  sutlixes  yu,  va ;  ayana,  i,^  ka, 
bha,  la. 

d.  Masc.  or  fern,  are  stems  formed  with  the  suffixes  ni, 
nil,  mi,  tr^ :  also  stems  formed  with  the  bare  root.'' 

e.  Masc.  or  neut.  are  stems  formed  with  the  suffixes  a, 
ta,  tha,  na,  vma,  ma,  ya,  ra,  tya,  tra,  tu,  an,  man,  van ; 
also  adjectives  formed  with  in,  vin,  ina,  iya,  tana,  tama, 
tara,  maya,  mant,  vant. 

/.   Masc,  fem.,  neut.  are  stems  formed  with  i  or  u. 

B.   Compounds. 

184.  I.  Verbal  Compounds  are  formed  by  combining 
roots  with  twenty  prepositions  and  a  few  adverbs.  The 
compound  verb  (which,  however,  in  finite  forms  is  actually 
compounded  only  in  subordinate  clauses  when  the  j) reposition 
immediately  precedes  the  verb)  is  conjugated  like  the  simple 
verb.  Thus  gam  go  combines  with  sam  together  to  sam-gam 
go  together,  unite ;  3.  s.  sam-gachati.  The  compound  root 
can  l)e  used  to  form  nominal  stems  by  means  of  the  primary 
suffixes  enumerated  above  (182,  1);  e.g.  sam-gam-a  m. 
union. 

a.  The  prepositions  which  are  compounded  with  roots  are 
the  following :  acha  to/cards,  ati  begoiul,  adhi  ujjon,  anu 
after,  antar  between,  apa  atrag,  api  on,  abhi  against,  ava 
down,  a  ^  near,  iid  up,  ni  down,  into,  nis  out,   para  away, 

^  When  they  are  of  course  m.  as  well  as  n. 
-  When  they  are  m. 
•*  In  patronymics. 

^  Stems  in  tr  are  always  m.  when  they  are  agent  nouns. 
^  These  when  used  as  adj.  are  occasionally,  neuter. 
''  The  preposition  a  reverses  the  sense  of  \erb8  of  going  or  giving  ; 
e.  g.  a-gara  cume,  a-da  take. 


2()6  VERBAL   COMPOUNDS  [is4 

pain  around,  pra  fortit,  prati  towards,  vi  asuHikr,  sam 
together. 

h.  A  few  adverbs  are  also  compounded  with  a  limited 
number  of  verbs : 

aram  at  hand  is  combined  with  kr  =  serve  (dat.),  prepare 
(hcc.)  ;  with  gam  =  serve  ;  with  bhu  =  serve,  conduce  to 
(dat.). 

avis  openly  is  combined  with  as,  bhu  and  kr  only  ;  with 
the  two  former  it  means  become  visible,  appear  ;  e.  g.  avis 
santi  being  manifest ;  avir  agnir  abhavat  Agni  became 
manifest ;  with  kr  it  means  malce  visible,  e.  g.  avis  karta 
make  manifest. 

tiras  aside  is  combined  with  bhu  be  and  dha '  put  only  ; 
e.  g.  ma  tiro  bhut  may  it  not  disappear. 

puras  in  front  is  combined  with  kr  do  and  dha  put  only  ; 
e.  g.  krnotu  ratharn  purah  may  he  place  (our)  car  in  the 
forefront. 

srad,  an  old  word  meaning  heart  (Gk.  KapS-ia  and  KpaS-Lr], 
Lat.  cord-),  having  acquired  the  character  of  an  adverb,  is 
once  combined  with  kr  and  often  with  dha,  put  in  the  sense 
of  p)ut  faith  in,  credit  ( =  Lat.  credo  for  cred-do),  but  is  nearly 
always  separated  from  the  verb  by  other  words ;  e.  g.  srad 
asmal  dhatta  believe  in  him  ;  srad  visva  varya  krdhi  entrust 
cdl  boons  (to  us). 

pra-dur  {before  the  door)  begins  to  appear  in  the  AV.  in 
combination  with  bhu  =  become  manifest,  appear. 

c.  A  few  substantives,  after  assuming  an  adverbial  charac- 
ter, appear  compounded,  like  verbal  prefixes,  with  jjarticipial 
forms  in  the  AV.  These  are :  asta-m  ^  home  with  i  go : 
astam-yant  setting,  astam-esyant  alout  to  set,  astam-ita 
set ;  namas  obeisance  with  the  gerund  of  kr  make :  namas- 
krtya  doing  homage. 


^  In  the  SB.  aiul  later  tiras  is  al«o  combined  witli  kr  do. 
2  This  word  is  still  a  substantive  in  the  RV. 


184-185]  VERBAL   COMPOUNDS  267 

In  the  RV.  a  few  substantives  designating  parts  of  the 
budy  are  compounded  with  the  gerund  of  grab  seize:  karna- 
gi'hya  seizing  by  the  ear,  pada-grhya  seising  bg  the  foot, 
hasta-grhya  grasping  hy  the  hand. 

(1.  The  interjection  hin  is  compounded  with  kr  in  the  sense 
of  utter  the  sound  hin,  murmur ;  e.  g.  hin-krnvati  lowing. 
There  are  also  a  few  reduplicated  interjectional  w'ords, 
mostly  onomatoi3oetic  and  nearly  always  ending  in  a,  that 
appear  compounded  with  bhu  and  kr  :  alala-bhavant  sound- 
ing merrily  ;  janjana-bhavant  sparkling  ;  malmala-bhavant 
glittering ;  bharbhara-bhavat  became  confounded ;  bibiba- 
bhavant  cracUing ;  kik.ira  krau  tear  to  tatters ;  masmasa 
karam  I  have  crushed;  masmasa  kuru  and  mrsmrsa  kuru 
crush ;  akhkhali-krtya  croaJcing. 

a.  The  latter  compound  is  the  only  cx\mple  in  the  RV.  of  i 
appearing  in&tead  of  a  before  kr  or  bhii.  The  AV.  has  vati-krta 
n.  a  disease  (from  vata  ivind). 

II.    Nominal  Compounds. 

185.  From  the  Indo-European  period  the  Vedic  language 
has  inherited  the  power  of  combining  two  or  more  words 
into  one  treated  like  a  simple  word  as  regards  accent, 
inflexion,  and  construction.  Both  in  the  frequency  and  in 
the  length  of  compounds  the  Vedic  language  resembles  the 
Greek  of  Homer.  In  the  RV.  and  the  AV.  no  compounds 
of  more  than  three  independent  members  are  met  with,  and 
those  in  which  three  occur  are  rare,  such  as  purva-kama- 
krtvan  fulflling  former  wishes. 

The  two  characteristic  features  of  a  compound  are  unity 
of  accent  and  employment  of  the  uninflected  stem  in  the 
first  member  (or  members)  ;  but  there  are  exceptions  to 
both  these  rules.    Occasionally  tmesis  of  a  compound  occurs.' 


^  Chiefly  in  dual  comi^ounds,  as  dyava  ha  ksama  heaven  and  earth  ; 
also  in  a  few  others,  as  nd.ra  va  samsara,  for  nara-samsam.  It  takes 
plaice  only  when  the  compound  is  doubly  accented. 


'268  NOMINAL   COMPOUNDS  [185-18(5 

The  yaiidhi  between  the  members  is,  moreover,  sometimes 
different  from  that  between  words  in  a  sentence. 

a.  The  gender  of  compounds,  if  they  end  in  substantives, 
is  with  few  excejitions  that  of  the  last  member  ;  the  gender 
of  collectives  is  always  neuter.  The  number  in  comjiounds 
depends  on  the  sense ;  that  in  collectives  is  always  singular. 
When  the  word  appearing  as  the  first  member  has  two 
stems,  the  weak  stem  is  used  ;  when  it  has  three,  the  middle 
stem  (73  a).  In  substantive  compounds  the  last  member 
retains,  as  a  rule,  its  gender,  form,  and  inflexion  ;  while  in 
adjectival  compounds  the  gender  and  inflexion  of  the  last 
member  are  of  course  variable. 

h.  Classification.  Vedic  compounds  may  be  divided  into 
three  main  classes  according  to  their  syntactical  relations  : 
1.  Co-ordinatives,  or  those  in  which  the  members  are 
co-ordinated  ;  2.  Determinatives,  or  those  in  which  the 
first  member  determines  or  limits  the  sense  of  the  last ; 
3.  Possessives,  or  adjectives  tlie  general  meaning  of  which 
implies  possession  (as  bahv-anna  possessing  miicJi  food).  To 
these  must  be  added,  in  order  to  classify  Vedic  compounds 
exhaustively,  three  lesser  groups :  4.  Governing  com- 
pounds, or  adjectives  in  which  the  first  member  governs  the 
last  in  sense  (as  ksayad-vira  rulUui  men) ;  5.  Syntactical 
compounds,  or  irregular  formations  arising  from  the  juxta- 
position of  t\'\'o  words  in  a  sentence  ;  G.  Iteratives,  or 
repeated  words  treated  as  compounds  in  the  Sainhitas 
inasmuch  as  they  have  only  one  accent  and  a  special  meaning 
when  thus  combined. 

1.    Co-ordinative  (Dvandva) '  Compounds. 

186.  These  consist  of  two  suljstantives,  far  less  commonly 
adjectives,  connected  in  sense  with  '  and '. 

1  This  term  applied  to  co-(jrdiiiutiv(j«  by  the  later  Hindu  gram- 
marians, means  pair  or  couple. 


ISC]  CO-ORDINATIVES  209 

A  1.  The  most  numerous  group  (about  three-fourths  of  all 
the  Dvandvas)  in  the  Rigveda  comprises  those  compounds 
(nearly  always  names  of  deities)  in  which  each  member  is 
dual  in  form  and  has  a  separate  accent ;  e.  g.  mitra-varuna 
Mttraand  Varuna;  ma,tar3i--pitsira  motJwr  and  father  ;  dyava- 
prthivi  heaven  and  earth.  In  the  RV.  the  two  duals  are  often 
separated,  as  in  the  line  a  nakta  barhih  sadatam  usasa 
let  Night  and  Dawn  seat  themselves  tijjon  the  litter.  The  proper 
genitive  of  such  compounds  is  e.  g.  mitrayor  varunayoh. 
But  as  these  co-ordinate  duals  early  came  to  be  regarded  as 
a  unit,  the  commonest  ending  of  the  first  member,  that  of 
the  N.  A.,  came  to  be  retained  unaltered  in  the  other  cases: 
G.  mitra-varunayoh,  I.  mitra-varunabhyam.  A  further 
step  towards  unification  is  taken  in  a  minority  of  cases  in 
which  the  first  member  loses  its  accent  and  the  last  syllable 
of  the  final  member  (irrespectively  of  its  original  accent) 
receives  the  acute,  as  surya-candramas-a  sun  and  moon 
(candra-mas).  The  last  stage  in  the  Rigveda  appears  in 
four  examples  in  which  the  first  member  assumes  the  stem- 
form,  e.  g.  indra-vayu  Indra  and  Vdyu.  In  the  later  Sam- 
hitas  and  in  B.  this  is  the  prevailing  type  in  new  formations, 
e.  g.  daksa-kratu  m.  vnll  and  understanding  (TB.). 

2.  Another  type  is  represented  by  the  plural  Dvandvas  * 
which  express  pairs  of  groups.  These  show  the  stem-form 
in  the  first  member  and  the  accent  on  the  final  syllable  of 
the  last.  The  only  examples  in  the  RV.  occur  in  Book  X  ; 
e.g.  aho-ratrani-  days  and  nights,  ajavayas  goats  (aja)  and 
sheep  (avi) ;  but  in  the  later  Sainhitas  this  type  becomes 
quite  general,  e.  g,  bhadra-papah  (AV.).  the  good  and  the  Ijad.^ 


^  Cp.  Latin  su-ove-tauriUa,  a  later  type  representing  three  groups. 

-  This  Dvandva  shows  a  double  in-egularity  :  the  gender  of  the  first 
member  has  prevailed  over  that  of  the  second,  and  the  f.  stem  ratrl 
has  been  changed  to  ratra. 

^  Several  of  the  cardinal  numerals  are  old  Dvandvas,  e.g.  dva- 
dasa  iicelre  Qwo  and  ten),  dva  being  an  old  dual  ;  tr&yo-dasa  thirteen 
ijliiee  and  ten). 


270  NOMINAL   COMPOUNDS  [1S6-187 

3.  There  occur  in  the  Samhitas  a  few  singular  Dvandvas 
which  express  a  collective  sense  and  are  always  neuter/  and 
accent  the  final  syllable  ;  e.  g.  ista-purtam "  ivJiat  has  been 
offered  or  given  ;  krta^akrtam  (AV.)  what  has  been  done  and 
not  done ;  kesa-smasrii  n.  Jiair  and  beard  (AV.) ;  bhadra- 
papam  (AV.)  good  and  evil]  samista-yajiis  (VS.)  sacrifice  and 
sacrificial  formuJa. 

B.  Dvandvas  consisting  of  adjectives  are  rare.  They  are 
of  three  types  : 

1.  The  adjectives  designate  colours,  their  combination 
expressing  a  mixture  of  the  two,  as  nila-lohita  dark  blue 
and  red  =  darh  red. 

2.  They  express  a  contrast,  as  utkula-nikula  (VS.)  going 
uphill  and  doivnhill. 

3.  They  are  used  with  dual  sul)stantives  to  express  that 
each  is  an  attribute  of  one  unit  of  the  kind,  as  pad-bhyam 
daksina-savyabhyam  (AV.)  irifh  the  two  feet,  the  right  and 
the  left. 

a.  The  old  dual  Dvandvas  (A  1)  are  frequently  repi-esented 
by  elliptical  duals  which  put  one  of  a  pair  in  the  dual  to 
express  both,  as  dyava  =  heaven  and  earth ;  mitra  =  Mitra 
and  Varum ;  pitara  =  father  and  mother ;  matara  =  mother 
and  father,  parents. 

2.    Determinatives. 

187.  This  numerous  class  of  compounds  comprises  two 
groups.  In  the  larger  group  (2  a)  the  first  member  has  the 
value  of  a  substantive  dependent,  in  the  sense  of  an  oblique 
case,  on  the  second,  which  may  be  either  a  verbal  noun  or 
an  ordinary  substantive.  This  may  be  called  the  dependent 
determinative  group  (named  Tatpurusa  by  the  later  Hindu 
grammarians).     In  the  other  group  (2  I)}  the  final  member, 


1  Cf.  the  Greek  vvxOqiJ-epoi'. 

-  Originally  doubtless  istapurta,  dual  in  both  members. 


187]  DETERMINATIVES  271 

if  an  ordinary  substantive,  is  described  adjectivally,  or,  if 
a  verbal  noun,  adverbially,  by  the  first  member.  This  may 
be  called  the  descriptive  determinative  group  (called  Karma- 
dharaya  by  the  later  Hindu  grammarians). 

2  a.    Dependent  (Tatpurusa)  Determinatives. 

A.  The  first  member  (substantive  or  pronoun)  may  have 
the  sense  (and  often  even  the  form)  of  any  oblique  case. 
When  it  has  an  ace,  inst.,  abl.,  or  loc.  sense,  the  final 
member  is  mostly  a  verbal  noun ;  ^  when  it  has  a  dat."  or 
gen.'  sense,  it  is  always  an  ordinary  noun.'*  The  compound 
may  be  a  substantive  or  an  adjective,  according  as  the  last 
member  is  one  or  the  other. 

1.  In  ace.  dependents  the  final  member  is  always  a  verbal 
noun  ;  e.g.  havir-ad  eating  the  olilathn  ;  go-ghna  coir-slayimj, 
asva-haya°  urging  on  steeds;  deva-madana  exhilarating 
the  gods ;  gara-girna  (AV.) '''  liaving  swallowed  jMtson  ;  bhtiri- 
davan  giving  much  ;  bhadra-vadin  uttering  an  auspicious  cry ; 
vaja-sati  f.  act  of  winning  hoot// ;  vrtra-hatya  n.  act  of 
slaying  Vrtra. 

2.  Inst. :  indra-patama  most  drunk  l>y  Indra ;  agni- 
dagdha  hurnt  ivith  fire  ;  deva-tta  ^  given  by  the  gods ;  aritra- 
parana,  adj.  crossing  ivith  oars  ;  tanu-subhra  shining  {nuth  =  ) 
in  body  ;  bala-vijnaya  to  he  recognized  by  liis  strength. 


^  The  subdivision  ending  in  verbal  nouns  may  be  called  '  verbal 
dependents '. 

2  Examples  of  this  sense  are  very  rare.  The  final  member  is  an 
ordinary  adjective  or  sulistantive. 

^  The  final  member  of  genitive  dependents  is  always  an  ordinary 
substantive. 

*  The  subdivision  ending  in  ordinary  substantives  may  be  called 
'  nominal  dependents '. 

5  Cf.  Greek  linTo-Sapio-s  horse'iaming. 

"  An  example  of  the  rare  use  of  a  past  pass.  part,  in  a  tr.ansitive 
sense. 

■7  tta  for  datta  (H'>o,  2  6). 


272  NOMINAL   COMPOUNDS  [is7 

3.  Dat. :  vakmaraja-satya  falt/i/ul  to  the  onlaincrs  of 
hymns  ;  visva-sambhu  salutary  for  all. 

4.  Abl. :  go-ja  produced  from  cows ;  tivra-su-t  pressed 
from  the  fermenting  mass. 

5.  Gen.  (the  commonest  sense) :  raja-putra  Icing's  son  ; 
vis-psitilo  rd  of  the  clan;  deva-kilbisa  m.  offi  nee  against  the 
gods  ; '  dru-pada  n.  post  ofivood.' 

6.  Loc. :  ahar-jata  (AV.)  horn  in  the  day  ;  uda-pluta  (AV.) 
swimming  in  the  water ;  purii-bhu  being  in  many  places ; 
bandhu-ksit  dwelling  among  relatives. 

a.  In  their  first  member  many  dependent  compounds 
retain  the  case-ending,  most  commonly  the  ace,  often  the 
loc,  but  the  rest  rarely.  Sing,  endings  (ace.  and  inst.)  may 
express  a  plur.  sense.  Plur.  endings  (ace.  and  loc.)  some- 
times occur,  but  du.  endings  never  in  these  compounds. 

The  aec.  generally  expresses  the  object  of  a  transitive 
verb.  The  form  in  am  is,  in  the  RV.,  the  rule  before  the 
verbal  nouns  -kara  maJcing,  -caya  collecting,  -jaya  conquer- 
ing, -tara  overcoming,  -dara  cleaving,  -bhara  hearing,  -ruja 
hrealdng,  -sani  winning,  -saha  overwhelming  ;  e.  g.  abhayam- 
kara  pirocnring  security,  dhanam-jaya  winning  tjooty,  pur- 
am-dara,^  destroying  forts,  sutam-bhara  *  receiving  pressed 
Soma ;  it  also  occurs  before  other  verbal  nouns,  not  infre- 
quently before  such  as  l^egin  with  vowels  ;  e.  g.  dhiyam-dha 
devout,  visvam-inva  all-moving,  asvam-isti^  seeding  horses. 
An  example  of  a  cognate  ace.  is  subham-ya  moving  in 
hrilliance,  and  of  an  adverbial  ace,  ugram-pasya  (AV.) 
looling  fiercely.  Examples  of  an  ace.  pi.  ending  are  ka-cit- 
kara  doing  all  manner  of  things  ;  pasva-isti "'  desiring  Jcine. 


1  An  example  of  an  objective  genitive. 

2  Here  the  genitive  expresses  the  material. 
'  The  singular  ace.  form  with  plural  sense. 

*  Also   im   in    pustim-bhard    hringing   pro^pcrilij    ami    harim-bliaril 

hearinc/  fhe  lawny  (bolt). 

•'■'  This  and  asvam-isti  are  Tatpurusa  possessives  (181),  2). 


187]  DEPENDENT   DETERMINATIVES  278 

Inst. :  gira-vi'dh  irjoiciiif/  i»  soiu/ ;  sunesita  driren  hy 
dogs  ^  (suna) ;  vidmanapas  worlchuj  (apas)  trith  wisdom 
(vidmana) ;  ksudha-mara  (AV.)  m.  death  hy  hunger ;  vaca- 
stena  -  thief  hy  speech,  secretly  injuring  hy  words. 

Dat.  :  the  only  example  seems  to  be  found  in  the  loose 
syntactical  compound  dasyave  vrka  wolf  to  the  Basyu,  used 
as  a  proper  name. 

Abl. :  divo-ja  produced  from  heaven  ;  divo-ruc  shining 
from  the  shy. 

Gen. :  very  common  before  pati  hitshand  or  lord,  as  gna-s- 
pati  hushand  of  a  divine  woman-,  ja-s-pati  lord  of  a  family  ; 
brahmanas-pati  lord  of  prayer:"  It  also  occurs  in  the 
proper  names  divo-dasa  servant  of  heaven  and  sunah-sepa 
Dog's-tail. 

Loc. :  common  in  the  RV.  before  agent  nouns  formed 
from  the  simple  root ;  e.  g.  divi-yaj  worshipping  in  heaven ; 
x'athe-stha  standing  o)i  a  car ;  also  before  several  formed 
with  a  :  e.  g.  divi-ksaya  dtvelling  in  heaven.  There  are  also 
several  examples  of  plurals,  as  apsu-sad  direlling  in  the 
waters;  gosu-yudh fighting  in  {=  for)  Jcine  ;  hrtsv-sis ptiercing 
the  heart.  The  singular  also  occurs  a  few  times  before  an 
ordinary  adj.  or  subst.,  as  made-raghu  quick  in  exhilaration  ; 
svapne-diihsvapnya  (AV.)  n.  evil  dream  in  sleep. 

a.  If  a  root  forms  the  last  member  of  a  Tatpurusa,  final  long 
vowels  (a,  i,  u)  undergo  no  change,  while  short  vowels*  (i,  u,  r")  usually 
add  a  determinative  t ;  e.  g.  agre-pa  drinkbuj  first  ;  yajna-ni  leading  the 


^  Singular  ending  with  plural  sense. 

2  A  rare  example  of  an  inst.  with  an  ordinary  substantive  as  final 
member. 

^  By  the  false  analogy  of  these  words  are  also  formed  from  a  stems 
rta-s-pati  lord  of  pious  ivorks  and  r^tha-s-pati  lord  of  (he  car.  DSm-pati 
lord  of  the  house  probably  =  dd.m-s-pati. 

*  Radical  a,  as  a  shortened  form  of  a,  often  appears  as  a  final, 
hciefiy  in  the  later  Samhitas,  as  agre-ga  going  in  front,  nama-dhd  (AV.) 
name-giving. 

1819  T 


274  NOMINAL   STEM   FORMATION  [187-188 

sacrifice  ;  raja-3u  king-creating  ;  but  divi-ksi-t  dwelling  in  heaven  ;  soma- 
su-t  Soma-2n-essing  ;  jyotis-kf-t  light -creating.  There  is,  however,  no  t 
added  in  va,na,T-guforest-ruaming.^ 


2  h.    Descriptive  (Karmadharaya)  ^  Compounds. 

188.  This  class  of  Determinatives  is  comparatively  rare 
in  the  Samhitas.  The  last  member  is  generally  an  ordinary 
substantive,  but  is  sometimes  a  verbal  or  an  ordinary 
adjective.  The  relation  of  the  first  member  to  the  last  is 
appositional,  attributive,  or  adverbial.  It  is  expressed  in 
three  ways : 

1.  By  a  Substantive.  If  followed  by  a  subst.,  it  has  an 
attributive  sense  equivalent  to  an  adj.  expressing  sex  or 
a  compound  nature;  e.g.  purusa-mrga  (VS.)  m.  [man  =) 
male  antelope  ;  ultika-yatu  m.  owl  demon,  i.  e.  demon  in 
form  of  an  owl ;  purusa-vyaghra  (VS.)  m.  man-tiger,  a  kind 
of  demon  ;  vrsa-kapi  m.  man-ape. 

If  followed  by  a  verbal  adj.,  the  preceding  subst.  is  usually 
appositional  in  sense ;  e.  g.  isana-krt  acting  as  a  ruler ; 
st6ma-tasta  fashioned  as  a  hymn  of  praise.  But  sometimes 
it  is  adverbial ;  e.  g.  rtv-ij  sacrificing  in  season  =  regidarly  ; 
sarga-takta  speeding  with  a  rush. 

a.  Before  a  verbal  noun  a  substantive  sometimes  implies  a  com- 
parison ;  e.  g.  dhara-vakd.  sounding  like  a  stream,  syend-jiita  speeding  like 
an  eagle.  Similarly  before  an  ordinary  adjective  :  suka-babhru  (VS.) 
reddish  like  a  parrot. 

2.  By  an  Adjective.  If  followed  by  an  ordinary  subst., 
the  adj.  has  the  usual  attributive  sense ;  e.  g.  candra-mas 
m.  (bright)  moon ;    krsna-sakuni  (AV.)  m.  raven  (lit.  hlacJc 


'  Final  u  sometimes  appears  as  a  shortened  form  of  u  in  some 
Tatpurusas,  as  dhi-jii  inspiring  the  mind;  puru-bhii  appearing  in  many 
'places. 

2  This  is  the  term  applied  to  this  class  of  compounds  ))y  the  later 


Hindu  grammai-ians. 


iss]  KARMADHARAYA   COMPOUNDS  275 

bird) ;  nava-jvara  m.  new  pain  ;  maha-grama  '  m.  (jrcat  hod  ; 
yavayat-sakha  m.  protecting  friend^-  Sometimes  the  qualify- 
ing adj.  indicates  a  part  of  what  the  last  member  expresses  ; 
e.  g.  adhara-kantha  (VS.)  m.  hiver  (part  of  the)  neclc ; 
ardha-deva  m.  demi-god ;  purvahna  '  m.  forenoon ;  ma- 
dhyam-dina  *  m.  midday. 

If  followed  by  a  verbal  noun,  the  preceding  adj.  is  adverbial 
in  sense  ;  ^  e.  g.  asu-patvan "  swift-// i/ing,  i.  e.  flying  swiftly  ; 
asu-heman  swiftly-speeding  ;  sana-ja  horn  of  old  (=  sana) ; 
satya-yaj  sacrificing  truly  {—  satyam),  dvi-ja  (AV.)  horn 
ttvice.''  Similarly  before  ordinary  adjectives  :  visva-scandra 
all-glittering  ;  hari-scandra  glittering  yellow ;  try-artisa '' 
(AV.)  ruddy  in  three  places. 

a.  At  the  end  of  Karmadliarayas  the  final  n  of  an  stems  is  dropped" 
in  eka-vrsa  (AV.)  m.  onJtj  buU,  maha-vrsa  (AV.)  m.  great  bitU,  bha- 
drahd'  (AV.)  n.  auspicious  daij. 

8.  By  an  Adverb  (inclusive  of  particles  and  prepositions) : 
aksnaya-druh  injuring  wrongly ;  amutra-bhuya  (AV.)  u. 
state  of  being  there  •  evara  quite  (eva)  ready  (ara) ;  punar- 
nava  renewing  itself;  punar-bhu  arising  again;  puro-yavan 
going  before  ;  puro-hita  placed  in  front ;  sato-mahat  equally 
(sa-tas)  great ;    satyam-ugra  truly  mighty ;    sayam-bhava 


'  As   first   member    of   Karmadharayas    (and   Bahnvrihis)    mahfit 
appears  as  maha  ;  but  the  AV.  has  mahat-kandd  great  section. 
^  Here  siXh-i  friend  becomes  sakha.     Cf.  189,  4  d  and  189  A.  2  a. 
.^  Here  dhan  day  is  syncopated  and  extended  with  a ;  also  in  apar- 
ahnd  (AV.)  afternoon,  ny-^hn-a  (AV.)  decline  of  dag. 

*  With  case-ending  retained  in  the  first  member. 

'^  The  sense  is  rather  appositional  in  purva-pa  drirJdng   (as)  frst, 
vamd-jata  horn  as  one  dear,  i.  e.  dear  hy  nature. 

*  Cf.  Gk.  uiKv-ireTTjs  swift-flying. 

''  Here   the   cardinals   are   used    for  the    numeral    adverljs    dvi-s, 
tri-s. 

^  This  is  much  commoner  in  Bahuvrlhis  (189,  4). 
^  Also  in  sad-ahd  (AV.)  m.  period  of  six  days  (189,  4), 

t2 


276  NOMINAL   STEM   FORMATION  [iss-iso 

(AV.)  m.  hecomimi  evening ;  pasca'-dosa  (VS.)  m.  later  part 
of  the  evening;  ida-vatsara '  (AV.)  m.  the  present  year ;  puro- 
agni*  (VS.)  m.  fire  in  front;  su-da  giving  tviUinghj  ;  duh- 
seva  imfavouraUe  ;  a-mitra  m.  non-friend,  enemy ;  su-vasana 
n.  fair  garment ;  ati-krsna  excessively  darJc ;  pra-napat  m. 
great  grandson  ;  adhi-raja  m.  supreme  king ;  pra-vira  ni. 
great  hero  ;  sam-vatsara  m.  fidl  year. 

3.    Possessive  (Bahuvrihi)  Compounds. 

189.  These  compounds  are  secondary  adjectives.  They 
are  determinatives  (generally  Karmadharayas),  ending  in 
substantives,  which  have  been  transformed  into  adjectives 
agreeing  in  gender,  number,  and  case  with  another  substan- 
tive expressed  or  understood.  The  transformation  is  accom- 
panied by  a  shift  of  accent  from  the  final  member  to  the 
first.  The  term  '  possessive '  is  probably  the  most  appropriate 
as  applied  to  these  compounds,  for  it  expresses  their  general 
meaning  in  the  vast  majority  of  cases  ;  in  a  few  instances 
the  more  comprehensive  sense  of  '  connected  with  '  is  required 
to  indicate  the  relation  between  the  substantive  and  the 
Bahuvrihi  compound  agreeing  with  it ;  e.  g.  visva-nara 
belonging  to  all  men.     Possessives  are  of  two  kinds  : 

1.  Karmadharaya  Possessives,  in  which  the  first  member 
is  an  attributive  adj.  (including  j^articiples),  an  appositional 
subst.,  or  an  adverb  (including  particles  and  prepositions) : 
e.  g.  ugra-bahu  powerful -armed ;  hata-matr  whose  mother  has 
heen  slain ;  rusad-vatsa  having  a  shining  calf;  asva-parna 
horse-winged,  i.  e.  whose  wings  are  horses  ;  indra-satru  having 
Indra  as  a  foe ;  raja-putra  having  Icings  as  sons ;  hiranya- 
nemi  whose  fellies  are  (made  of)  gold;  asta-pad^  eight-footed, 
dvi-V3^d-' two-footed ;  ittha-dhi  having  such  thought,  devout; 
puro-ratha   ivhose   car  is    in  front;    vi-griva    wry-necJced; 


1  Here  the  adverbs  preceding  ordinaiy  substantives  are  =  adjectives. 

2  Gk.  oKTw-TToS-.  ^  Lat.  li-ped-. 


I 


189]  BAHUVRIHI   COMPOUNDS  277 

an-udra '  icatetiess  ;  a-pad  footless ;  ku-yava  causing  a  bad 
harvest]  dus-pad  ill-footed;  su-parna  heautiful- winged. 

a.  In  some  i^ossessives  based  on  appositional  Karmadharayas  a 
comijarison  of  the  first  with  the  final  membei-  is  implied  ;  e.  g.  varsajya 

(AV.)  ichose  rain  is  (like)  butter  ;  vrksd,-kesa  whose  trees  are  (like)  hair, 
tree-haired  =  wooded  (mountain). 

I).  The  superlatives  jy^stha  chief  and  srestha  hest,  tlie  comparative 
bhiiyas  more,  and  para  higher,  are  used  substantively  as  final  member 
of  possessives  :  indra-jyestha  huriiifj  Indra  as  chief,  yaraa-srestha  (AV.) 
of  whom  Yania  is  lest,  asthi-bhuyams  (AV.)  having  bone  as  its  chief 
part  =  cliiefly  bone,  avara-s-para^  (VS.)  in  ichich  the  lower  is  higher,  topsy-iurvij. 

2.  In  Tatpurusa  Possessives  the  first  member  most 
commonly  has  a  gen.,  not  infrequently  a  loc,  but  rarely  an 
inst.  or  ace.  sense.  The  case-ending  is  in  several  instances 
retained.  Examples  are:  rayas-kama  having  a  desire  for 
wealth ;  divi-yoni  having  {his)  origin  in  heaven ;  bhasa-ketu 
recognimhle  hg  light ;  tvam-kama  having  a  desire  for  thee. 

a.  In  possessives  based  on  gen.  Tatpurusas,  the  first  member  often 
implies  a  comparison,  but  never  with  a  case-ending  ;   as  agni-tejas 

i^AV.)  having  the  brightness  of  fire,  fire-bright ;  fksa-griva  bear-necked ; 
go-vapus  cow-shaped ;  mano-java  hating  the  swiftness  of  thought,  swift  as 
thought;  mayiira-ronian  having  the  plumes  of  peacocks. 

b.  When  a  loc.  sense  is  intended,  25arts  of  the  body  appear  as  the 
last  member;  e.g.  asru-mukha  (AV.)  Iiacing  tears  on  her  face,  tear- 
faced  ;  ghrta-prstha  having  butter  on  his  back,  butter-backed  ;  patra-hasta 

(AV.)  having  a  vessel  in  his  hand  ;  mani-griva  liaving  pearls  on  the  neck  ; 
madhu-jihva  having  honey  on  ids  tongue  ;  vajra-bahu  having  a  bolt  on 
his  arm. 

8.  Bahuvrlhis  come  to  be  used  substantively,  when  the 
noun  with  which  they  agree  is  dropped :  thus  su-parna 
fair-iuinged,  m.  bird.  Of  this  use  there  are  three  appli- 
cations : 

a.  These  compounds  very  frequently  appear  as  m.,  some- 
times as  f.,  proper  names,   the  adjectival  sense  often  not 

'  Gk.  dv-v5po-s, 

'  Here  the  s  of  the  num.  survives  from  the  use  of  the  two  words  in 
syntactical  juxtaposition.     Cp.  the  later  para-s-para  and  anyo-'nya. 


278  NOMINAL   STEM   FOKMATION  [189 

occurring  at  all.  Thus  brhad-uktha  adj.  having  great  2)t'aise, 
m.  a  seer  :  brhad-diva  adj.  (licelling  in  high  heaven,  m.  a  seer, 
f.  brhad-diva  a  goddess  ;  m.  as  names  only,  Priya-medha 
[to  ivhom  sacrifice  is  dear)  and  Vama-deva  {io  whom  the  gods 
are  dear). 

b.  They  appear  not  infrequentl}^  as  n.  substantives  with 
an  abstract  (sometimes  a  collective)  sense,  especially  when 
the  first  member  is  the  privative  particle  a-  or  an-,  or  the 
adjective  sarva  all ;  e.  g.  an-apatya,  adj.  childless  (AV.), 
n.  childlessness',  sarva- vedasa  (AV.)  n.  whole  2)ro;pcrty', 
ni-kilbisa  n.  deliverance  from  sin  ;  matr-bandhu  (AV.)  n. 
maternal  Jdnship. 

c.  With  numerals,   from  dvi  two  upwards,  as  their  first 
member,   they  form  sing,   neuters '    (always  ending  in  ac- 
cented a)  with  a  collective  sense  ;  e.  g.  tri-yuga  n.  period  of 
three  lives  ;  dvi-raja  (AV.)  n.  battle  of  two  lungs  ;  dasangula 
n.  length  of  ten  fingers  (4  d). 

4.  The  final  member  of  Bahuvrlhis  is  liable  to  various 
changes  tending  to  make  it  end  in  a. 

«.  The  n  of  several  words  in  an,  k^rmau,"  dharaan,  naman,  p4rvan, 
vfsan,  sakthin,  is  frequently  dropjied  in  ordinary  Bahuvrlhis,  and  that 
of  dhan  in  numeral  collectives  ;  e.  g.  visvd-karma^  jierforming  all  icork, 
priya-dharaa  occupying  desirable  places,  chando-nami  (VS.)  named  metre, 
metrical,  vi-parva*  joinfless,  dvi-vrs£  (VS.)  having  txvo  hulls,  lomasd- 
saktha  (VS.)  haxing  hainj  thighs  ;  sad-aha  (AV.)  ni.  pei'iod  of  six  days. 

b.  Tlie  suffixes  a  and  ya  ai'e  frequently  added,  and  sometimes  ka ; 
e.  g.  catur-aks-d  four-eyed,  su-g^v-a  having  fine  cows,  anyodar-ya  horn 
from  another  womb  (uddra),  ddsa-mas-ya  ten  months  old,  madhu-hast-ya 

honej-ha)ided,  try-amba-ka  haring  three  mothers,  vi-manyu-ka  (AV.)/rec 
from  anger,  a-karnd-ka  (TS.)  earless. 

c.  The    suffix   in    {possessing)    is    sometimes    pleonasticallj'   added  : 
maha-hast-m  having  large  hands,  ku-nakh-in  (AV.)  having  had  nails. 


'  Except  those  formed  with  aha  day,  which  are  m.,  as  sad-aha  m. 
series  of  six  days. 

2  But  this  word  retains  its  n  in  seven  compounds  in  the  RV. 

*  But  also  viiSvdL-karman. 

*  But  a-parv&n  and  vfsa-parvan. 


189]  BAHUVEIHI   COMPOUNDS  279 

yaio-bhag-in  (VS.)   rich  in  (jlonj,   sa-rath-in  (VS.)    riding    in  the  same 
chariot. 

d.  a  is  substituteil  for  i  in  kava-sakbd^  having  a  niggard  for  a  friend, 
and  in  dasangulfi  n.  length  of  (en  fingers  (anguli).  On  the  other  hand, 
i  is  substituted  for  a  in  some  comiiounds  of  gandhd.  smell,  and  in 
a  few  others :  dhumd-gandhi  smelling  of  smoke,  kr.std-radhi  (AV.) 
attaining  success  (radha)  in  agriculture,  prd.ty-ardhi  to  uhoin  the  half 
(drdha)  belongs. 

e.  In  the  f.  of  Bahuvrlhis  pSti  hnshand  or  lord,  instead  of  remaining 
unclianged,  takes  the  f.  form  of  the  subst,  (patni  ivife)  in  das^-patni 
having  a  demon  as  master,  deva-patni  having  a  god  as  a  husband,  vfsa- 
patni  ruled  by  a  mighty  one,  sura-patni  haring  a  hero  as  a  husband. 

4.    Governing  Compounds. 

189  A.  In  this  class,  which  embraces  a  considerable 
number  of  compounds,  the  first  member,  being  either  a 
preposition  or  a  verbal  noun,  governs  the  last  in  sense. 
They  resemble  Bahuvrlhis  in  form^  as  well  as  in  their 
adjectival  character. 

1.  In  the  prepositional  group,  in  which  about  twenty 
examples  occur  in  the  RV.,  the  first  member  is  a  preposition 
capable  of  governing  a  case  ;  e.g.  ati-ratra^  lasting  overnujld ; 
anu-kama  according  to  ivisli ;  a-pathi  and  a-pathi  he'mg  on 
the  icay  ;  paro-matra  going  beyond  measure,  excessive. 

a.  Like  Bahuvrlhis,  compounds  of  this  type  may  become  substan- 
tives ;  e.  g.  upanas-a  adj.  being  on  a  xoagon,  n.  (AV.)  sipace  on  a  %mgon. 

b.  The  final  member,  when  it  does  not  end  in  a,  adds  the  suffix  a, 
and  ya  sometimes  even  when  it  already  ends  in  a  ;  e.g.  anu-path-a 
going  along  the  road,  adhas-pad-a  being  under  the  feet,  pard-ks-a  (AV.) 
aicay  from  the  eye  (^ks),  puro-gav-a  m.   leader  (going  before  the  cows) ; 


1  Otherwise  sakhi  remains  unchanged  in  both  Bahuvrlhis  and 
Karmadharayas  (but  188,  2)  in  the  RV.  ;  cp.  189,  2a. 

2  But  the  meaning  is  entirely  different ;  for  in  tlie  prepositional 
class  the  first  member  has  the  sense  of  a  prep,  (not  an  adj.),  and  in 
the  verbal  class,  it  has  a  transitive  (not  an  intransitive)  sense.  In 
the  latter  class  the  final  syllable  of  a  part,  is  always  accented  (but 
in  Bahuvrlhis  only  when  that  is  the  natural  accent). 

'  Here  ratri  night  becomes  ratra,  as  in  the  Dvandva  aho-ratrfi  n. 
day  and  night. 


280  NOMINAL   STEM   FORMATION  [WJ 

adhi-gart-ya  helufj  on  ike  car-seal  (gartai,  antah-parsav-y^  (VS.)  hciiKj 
hchveen  the  libs  (pdrsu),  upa-mas-ya  (AV.)  occurring  every  montli  (masa), 
tiro-ahn-ya  (being  beyond  a  day),  belonging  to  ihe  day  (ahan)  before 
yesterday. 

2.  In  the  verbally  governing  class  the  first  member  is  an 

agent  noun  or  an  action  noun  governing  the  last  member  as 

an  object.    With  a  single  exception  '  they  never  add  a  suffix. 

Three  types  (in   all    of  which  examples  of  proper  names 

occur)  may  be  distinguished. 

a.  In  the  commonest  type,  which  is  ;\hnost  restricted  to  the  RV. , 
the  first  member  is  a  participle  ending  in  dt  formed  from  transitive 
present  stems  in  a,  d,  or  dya  ;  e.  g.  rdhd,d-vara  -  increasing  goods,  tardd- 
dvesas  overcoming  (tdrat)  foes,  dharayat-kavi  supporting  the  wise,  man- 
daydt-sakha'  gladdening  Ids  friend.  The  following  are  used  as  proper 
names:  rdhdd-ray'^  {^increasing  wealth),  jamdd-agni*  {going  to  Agni), 
bharad-vaja  {carrying  off  the  prize). 

b.  Only  three  or  four  examples  occur  of  a  second  type,  in  which  the 
first  member  consists  of  a  simple  present  stem  (probably  representing 
an  imperative) :  rada-vasu^  dispensing  icecdth,  siksa-nar-d"  helping  men; 
as  the  name  of  a  man  :  trasa-dasyu  {terrify  the  foe). 

c.  Some  half  dozen  examples  occur  in  the  RV.  of  a  third  type,  in 
which  the  first  member  is  an  action-noun  in  ti :  dati-vara  giving 
treasures,  viti-radhas  enjoying  the  oblation,  vrsti-dyav  causing  tlie  sky  to 
rain  ;  as  the  name  of  a  man  :  pusti-gu  m.  {rearing  kine). 

5.    Syntactical  Compounds. 

189  B.  A  certain  number  of  irregular  compounds  are 
formed  in  a  manner  differing  from  that  of  any  of  the  four 
classes  described  above.  They  may  be  treated  as  a  class, 
since  all  of  them  have  been  produced  by  the  same  cause: 
frequent  syntactical  juxtaposition  in  a  sentence. 


^  siksa-nar-d ;  see  below,  note  G. 

^  rdhdt  aor.  i^art.  of  rdh  increase. 

^  saikhi friend  becomes  sakha  in  two  other  governing  compounds: 
dravayat-sakha  speeding  his  friend  and  sravaydt-sakha  making  his 
friend  famous.     Cf.  188,  2,  note  2. 

*  jaraat  is  a  palatalized  form  of  an  aor.  jiart.  of  gam  go. 

^  In  this  and  the  following  example  the  a  of  rada  and  siksa  is 
metrically  lengthened. 

®  Here  the  stem  of  the  final  member  is  extended  with  a. 


iJfiV 


i«»]  SYNTACTICAL   COMPOUNDS  281 

a.  The  relative  adverb  yad  (a  nominally  formed  abl.)  in  so 
far  as  has  come  to  be  compounded  with  a  superlative  in  the 
adj.  yac-chrestha  tJie  best  jwssibJc  (lit.  in  so  far  as  best),  and 
with  a  gerundive  in  the  adv.  yad-radhyam  as  quicJdi/  us 
2)ossible  (lit.  in  so  far  as  attainable). 

b.  The  initial  words  of  a  text  begin  to  be  compounded 
in  the  later  Samhitas  as  a  substantive  to  designate  that  text. 
Thus  ye-yajamaha  (VS.)  m.,  used  in  the  N.  pi.,  means  the 
text  beginning  with  the  words  yd  yajamahe. 

c.  Several  subst.  or  adj.  compounds  have  resulted  from 
phrases  consisting  of  two  words  in  juxtaposition.  Thus 
aham-uttara  (AV.)  n.  disinite  for  precedence  (from  aham 
uttarah  I  am  higher) ;  mama-satya  n.  dispute  as  to  oicner- 
ship  (from  mama  satyam  it  is  certainlij  mine)  ;  mam-pasya 
(AV.)  designation  of  an  aphrodisiac  plant  (from  mam  pasya 
look  at  me) ;  kuvit-sa  some  one  (from  kuvit  sa  is  it  he  r") ; 
aham-sana  (voc.)  rapacious  (from  aham  sana  I  icill  obtain) ; 
aham-purva  eager  to  be  first  (from  aham  purvah  I  should 
he  first);  kim-tva  (VS.)  asJcing  garrulouslg  (from  kim  tvam 
what  are  ijou  doing?). 

6.    Iterative  Compounds. 

189  C.  Substantives,  adjectives,  pronouns,  numerals, 
adverbs,  and  prepositions  are  often  repeated.  They  are  then 
treated  as  compounds,  the  second  member  losing  its  accent 
and  the  two  words  l^feing  written  in  the  Pada  text  with  the 
Avagraha  between  them,  as  in  other  compounds.  This  class 
resembles  other  compounds  in  having  a  single  accent,  but 
differs  from  them  in  having  not  the  stem  but  the  fully 
inflected  form  of  nominal  words  in  the  first  member. 
In  the  KV.  the  iteratives  number  over  140,  rather  more 
than  half  of  them  being  substantives.  The  sense  conveyed 
by  the  repetition  is  frequency,  or  constant  succession  in 
time,  or  distribution  in  space.  Examples  of  the  various 
kinds  of  iteratives  are  the  following : 


282  NOMINAL   STEM   FORMATION  [189 

a.  Substantives:  ahar-ahar/  div6-dive,^  dyavi-dyavi 
ever}/  day,  masi-masi  mo7ith  after  month  ;  grh6-grhe,  dame- 
dame,  vise- vise"-  in  cvenj  Jwuse ;  angad-angat /rom  every 
limb  ;  diso-disah  (AV.)  from  evert/  qttarfer ;  yajnasya-yajna- 
sya  of  ever!/  sacrifice ;  parvani-parvani  in  cveru  joint ; 
agnim-agnim  (duvasyata),  {ivorship)  Agni  again  and  again ; 
annam-annam  {AN.)  food  in  perpeiiiitg. 

h.  Adjectives:  panyam-panyam  .  .  somam  Soma  who  is 
again  and  again  to  be  praised ;  pracim-pracim  pradisam 
each  eastern  direction ;  uttaram-uttaram  samam  (AV.)  each 
folio  tcing  gear. 

c.  Pronouns :  tvam-tvam  aharyathah  thou  didst  ever 
rejoice;  yad-yad  yami  whatever  I  asJc ;  tat-tad  .  .  dadhe /<e 
always  bestows  that? 

d.  Numerals  :  panca-pafica  five  each  time  ;  sapta-sapta 
(tredha  three  times)  seven  in  each  case  {=  21).'' 

e.  Adverbs:^  yatha-yatha  as  in  each  case;  adyadya 
svah-svah  on  each  to-day,  on  each  to-morrow. 

f.  Prepositions  :  the  four  which  are  found  used  thus  are 
lipa.  para,  pra,  tam  ;  e.  g.  pra-pra  .  .  sasyate  it  is  ever 
proclaimed. 

g.  The  only  example  of  a  verbal  form  occurring  as  an 
iterative  is  piba-piba  drinli,  drink.^  Otherwise  a  repeated 
verb  is  treated  independently ;  e.  g.  stuhi  stuhi  praise,  praise. 


1 


'  ahar-divi  day  after  day,  is  a  kind  of  mixed  iterative. 

-  For  divi'-divi  and  visf-visi,  owing  to  tho  influence  of  the  frequent 
loc.  in  6  from  a  stems. 

^  In  the  SB.  such  words  are  repeated  witli  va  :  yavad  va  yavad  va 
and  yatame  va  yatanie  va. 

*  Sucli  iteratives  led  to  the  formation  of  regular  compounds  in  B. : 
eka-ekah  (AV.) :  ekaikah  (^SB.) ;  dva-dva  .RV.):  dvan-dvdm  (MS.) 
in  twos,  dvan-dv^  patV  (B.). 

^  In  a  few  instances  repeated  adverbs  are  not  treated  as  compounds, 
both  words  being  accented  :  nil  nu  now,  noiv ;  ih^hd.  (AV.)  here,  here, 
but  always  iheha  in  RV. 

'  In  the  SB.  also  occurs  yajasva-yajasva. 


/ 


CHAPTER    VII 

OUTLINES   OF   SYNTAX 

190.  Having  in  the  preceding  parts  of  the  present 
grammar  dealt  with  single  words  in  their  phonetic,  their 
derivative,  and  their  inflexional  aspects,  we  now  turn  to 
their  treatment  in  syntax,  which  regards  their  arrangement 
and  mutual  meaning  when  they  are  combined  to  form  a 
sentence,  which  is  the  expression  of  a  connected  and  definite 
unit  of  thought.  The  parts  of  which  the  sentence  may 
consist  are  either  inflected  words :  the  noun  (substantive 
and  adjective)  and  the  verb,  the  participle  which  shares  the 
nature  of  both,  and  the  pronoun  ;  or  uninflected  words : 
prepositions,  adverbs,  and  conjunctions.  A  comparison  of 
the  syntax  of  the  RV.  with  that  of  classical  Sanskrit  shows 
(1)  that  the  use  of  the  middle  voice,  the  tenses,  the  moods, 
the  inflected  participles,  the  infinitives,  and  the  genuine 
prepositions  is  much  fuller  and  more  living  in  the  former, 
while  (2)  that  of  the  passive  voice  and  of  indeclinable  par- 
ticiples is  much  less  developed,  that  of  absolute  cases  and  of 
adverbial  prepositions  with  case-endings  is  only  incipient, 
and  that  of  periphrastic  vei'bal  forms  is  non-existent.  The 
later  Samhitas  and  the  Brahmanas  exhibit  a  gradual  transition 
by  restriction  or  loss  in  the  former  group  and  by  growth  in 
the  latter  to  the  condition  of  things  prevailing  in  classical 
Sanskrit. 

The  Order  of  Words. 

191.  Since  metrical  considerations  largely  interfere  with 
the  ordinary  position  of  words  in  the  Samhitas,  the  normal 
order  is  best  represented  by  the  prose  of  the  Brahmanas, 


284  OUTLINES   OF   SYNTAX  [191 

and  as  it  there  appears  is,  moreover,  doubtless  the  original 
one. 

The  general  rule  is  that  the  subject  begins  the  sentence 
and  the  verb  ends  it,  the  remaining  members  coming 
between. 

a.  The  subject  begins  the  sentence  ;  e.  g.  visah  ksatriya- 
ya  balim  haranti  the  peasants  pay  tribute  to  the  prince  (SB.). 
It  may,  however,  be  preceded  by  a  particle  like  uta  or 
occasionally  by  any  other  member  of  the  sentence  intended 
to  be  strongly  emphasized  ;  e.  g.  pray aj air  vai  devah 
svargam  lokam  ayan  htj  means  of  the  Fratjdjas  the  gods  went 
to  the  heavenly  ivorld  (SB.). 

h.  The  verb  occasionally  moves  to  the  beginning  of  the 
sentence  when  it  is  strongly  emj^hasized  ;  e.  g.  yanti  va  apa, 
6ty  aditya,  6ti  candrama,  ydnti  naksatrani  the  ivaters 
move,  the  sun  moves,  the  moon  moves,  the  stars  move  (SB.). 
A  predicative  noun  with  the  copula  (which  may  be  omitted) 
"being  equivalent  to  a  verb,  naturally  occupies  the  same 
position ;  e.  g.  sarve  ha  vai  deva  agre  sadrsa  asuh  all  the 
gods  in  the  heginning  were  similar  (SB.) ;  mitro  vai  sivo 
devanam  Mitra,  indeed,  is  the  Jcindly  one  among  the  gods  (TS.). 
Nevertheless  the  predicative  noun,  being  emphatic,  is  as  a 
rule  the  first  word  in  the  sentence  ;  e.  g.  martya  ha  va  agre 
deva  asuh  the  gods  ivere  originally  mortals  (SB.) ;  piiruso  vai 
yajnah  the  sacrifiee  (is)  a  man  (SB.). 

c.  As  regards  the  cases,  the  ace.  is  x>laced  immediately 
before  the  verb  ;  e.g.  chandamsi  yuktani  devebhyo  yajnam 
vahanti  tlie  metres,  when  they  are  yoJced,  take  the  sacrifice  to 
the  gods  (SB.).  Adverbs  and  indeclinable  participles  occupy 
a  similar  position.  Occasionally  such  words  move  to  the 
beginning  ;  e.  g.  divi  vai  soma  asid,  atha^iha  devah  in 
heaven  was  Soma,  hut  here  the  gods  (SB.). 

d.  The  apposition,  including  patronymics  and  participles, 
follows  the  word  which  it  explains  or  defines  ;  e.  g.  some 
raja  Soma,  the  King.     A  participle,  in  its  proper  sense,  if 


101]  ORDEK    OF   WORDS  285 

emiihatic  may  be  placed  at  the  beginning  ;  e.  g.  svapantam 
vai  diksitam  raksamsi  jigharasanti  H  is  when  lie  sleeps  that 
the  llalcmses  seek  to  slay  the  initiated  man  (TS.). 

e.  The  attribute,  whether  adjective  or  genitive,  precedes 
its  substantive ;  e.  g.  hiranyayena  rathena  nuth  golden  car 
(i.  Sb'^) ;  devanam  hota  the  priest  of  the  gods.  Only  when 
adjectives  are  used  in  apposition,  especially  as  epithets  of 
the  gods,  do  they  follow ;  e.  g.  mitraya  satyaya  to  Mitra, 
the  true  (TS.)-  Also  adjectives  designating  the  colours  of 
certain  animals,  especially  horses  and  cows,  are  found  after 
the  subst.  The  subst.  belonging  to  a  gen.  is  placed  before 
the  latter  only  when  it  is  emphatic. 

,/;  The  preposition  belonging  to  a  verb  precedes  it,  always 
in  B.,  generally  in  V..  where,  however,  it  also  sometimes 
follows  ;  e.  g.  jayema  sam  yudhi  sprdhah  ive  would  conquer 
our  foes  in  battle  (i.  8-^).  The  preposition  as  a  rule  imme- 
diately precedes  the  verb,  but  is  often  also  separated  from  it 
by  one  or  more  words  ;  e.  g.  a  sayakam  maghava^adatta 
the  Bounteous  One  seised  his  missile  (i.  32  ■) ;  apa  tamah 
papmanam  hate  she  drives  aivay  darkness  and  sin  (TS.). 
When  a  compound  verb  is  emphatic,  the  preposition  alone 
as  a  rule  moves  to  the  front  occupying  the  position  that  the 
simple  verb  would  occupy ;  e.  g.  pra  prajaya  jayeya  I  tvould 
increase  with  progeny  (TS.). 

When  used  with  substantives  the  genuine  prepositions  as 
a  rule  follow  their  case,  while  the  prepositional  adverbs 
precede  it.  The  reason  of  this  doubtless  is  that  the  former 
supplement  the  sense  of  the  case,  while  the  latter  modify 
the  sense  much  more  emphatically. 

g.  Multiplicative  adverbs  precede  their  genitive  ;  e.  g. 
trih  samvatsarasya  three  times  a  year. 

h.  Enclitics  cannot,  of  course,  begin  a  sentence.  If  they 
belong  to  a  particular  word  they  follow  it ;  otherwise  they 
tend  to  occupy  the  second  position  in  the  sentence.  The 
enclitic  particles  that  follow  the  word  with  which  they  are 


286  ,     OUTLINES   OF  SYNTAX  [191 

most  closely  connected  are  ca,  va,  iva,  cid ;  kam  is 
restricted  to  following  nu,  su,  hi  in  V.,  and  sma  to  follow- 
ing ha  in  B.  The  other  unaccented  particles,  u,  gha, 
ha,  svid,  which  refer  to  the  statement  of  the  whole 
sentence,  occupy  the  second  (or  third)  position  in  the 
sentence. 

i.  Even  accented  particles  for  the  most  part  cannot 
begin  a  sentence.  They  either  follow  the  word  they  em- 
phasize in  any  position  in  the  sentence :  a,  eva,  kam  ;  or 
they  occupy  the  second  position  in  the  sentence,  as  empha- 
sizing the  whole  statement :  anga,  aha,  id,  kila,  khalu,  tu, 
nii,  vai,  hi. 

The  only  particles  that  can  begin  the  sentence  are  atha, 
dpi,  uta ;  also  na  if  it  negatives  the  whole  sentence,  but  if 
it  negatives  the  verb  only,  it  follows  that. 

j.  Forms  of  the  pronoun  ta  tend  in  B.  to  occupy  the  first 
position,  especially  sa  when  it  anticipates  a  proper  name  in 
dialogues,  or  tad  as  an  ace.  when  famous  authorities  are 
quoted  ;  e.  g.  sa  hovaca  gargyah  (SB.)  Garg/ja  spoJce  (as 
follows) ;  tad  u  hovaca^asurih  with  regard  to  this  Asuri 
said  (SB.).  The  order  is  similar  when  atha  or  api  are  used  : 
api  hovaca  yajnavalkyah  (SB.). 

Jc.  In  relative  and  interrogative  sentences  there  is  nothing 
peculiar  except  that,  as  these  two  classes  of  words  tend  to 
begin  the  sentence,  cases  of  them  come  to  occupy  the  first 
position  which  in  ordinary  sentences  do  not  occupy  it ;  e.  g. 
kim  hi  sa  tair  grhaih  knryat  what  indeed  should  he  do  with 
this  house  ?  (SB.). 

a.  The  last  position  in  the  sentence  is  exceptionally  occupied  in  the 
following  ways  :  1.  very  often  by  final  datives  as  a  supplement  to 
the  sentence  ;  e.  g.  t£t  pasiin  eva^_^asmai  pdri  dadati  guptyai  thus 
he  hands  the  cattle  over  to  him  for  protection  f^SB.)  ;  2.  by  the  subject  either 
when  it  is  the  name  of  an  authority  quoted  or  when  it  is  ecxuivalent 
to  a  relative  clause;  e.  g.  sd  ha^uvaea  gargyah  so  said  Gurgya ;  aindrdm 
carum  nir  vapet  pasvikamah  o»e  (who  is^  desirous  of  cattle  should  assign 
a  pap  for  Indra  (TS.). 


192-193]  ORDER   OF   WORDS  ^287 

192.  There  is  neither  an  iiulelinite  nor  a  definite  article 
in  the  Vedic  language.  Their  moaning  is  inherent  in  the 
substantive  much  as  personal  pronouns  are  in  forms  of 
the  definite  verb.  Whether  the  one  or  the  other  is  meant 
is  made  sufficiently  clear  by  the  context ;  e.  g.  agnim  ile 
purohitam  I  praise  Agni  the  domestic  priest  (i.  1^);  agnim 
manye  pitaram  Agni  I  deem  a  father  (x.  7'').  In  B.  the 
anaphoric  use  of  ta  is  sometimes  very  nearly  equivalent  to 
the  definite  article  (cp.  195  B  3^  p.  294). 


Number. 

193.  1.  Singular  words  with  a  plural  or  a  collective  sense 
are  always  treated  strictly  as  singulars,  being  never  con- 
strued with  a  plural  form  of  the  verb  (cp.  194). 

2.  The  dual  number  is  in  regular  use  and,  generally 
speaking,  in  strict  application.  But  in  certain  parts  of  the 
RV.  the  plural  is  often  used  instead  of  the  dual  of  natural 
pairs  ;  sometimes  also  otlierwise  ;  e.  g.  sam  anjantu  visve 
devah.,  sam  apo  hrdayani  nau  let  all  the  gods,  let  the  waters 
unite  the  hearts  of  us  two  (x.  SS"*'). 

a.  A  m.  or  f.  du.  is  sometimes  used  to  express  a  male  and 
female  of  the  same  class ;  e.  g.  pitara  =  father  and  mother ; 
matara  =  mother  and  father.  This  type  of  the  dual  has  its 
widest  application  in  naming  pairs  of  deities  by  means  of 
one  of  them  and  is  equivalent  to  dual  compounds  containing 
both  names  ;  e.g.  dyava  heaven  and  earth  (=  dyava-prthivi) ; 
usasa  Datvn  and  Night  {=  usasa-nakta) ;  mitra  3Iitra  and 
Varuna  {=  mitra- varuna).  Sometimes  the  other  member 
of  the  pair  is  added  in  the  N.  sing.  ;  e.  g.  mitra  tana  na 
rathya  varuno  yds  ea  sukratuli  Mitra  [and  Varuna)  and 
the  very  wise  Varuna,  like  two  constant  charioteers  (viii.  25^). 

3.  a.  The  plural  is  sometimes  used  (analogously  to  the 
dual)  so  as  to  include  the  other  two  of  a  group  of  three ; 
e.  g.   dyavah  the   (three)  heavens  —  heaven,    air,    and   earth  ; 


288  OUTLINES   OF  SYNTAX  {m-m 

prthivih  fJie  (three)  eart]i.<^  =  earth,  air,  and  licavcn.'^  This 
inclusive  plural  is  also  found  with  the  names  of  the  two 
other  members  of  the  group  added  in  the  N.  sing,  ;  thus 
abhi  samrajo  varuno  grnanty,  abhi  mitraso  aryama 
sajdsah  to  it  the  universal  sovereigns  Varnna,  to  it  the  Mifras 
{=  Mitra,  Varuna,  Arytiman),  and  Aryaman,  accordant,  sinq 
(vii.  38^). 

1).  The  1.  pers.  pi.  is  sometimes  loosely  used  instead  of 
the  sing,  or  du.  ;  thus  Yama  in  his  dialogue  with  YamI  says 
na  yat  pura  cakrma  kad  dha  nunam  rta  vadanto  anrtam 
rapema  how  ]}ray  can  we,  tvhat  we  have  never  done  lefore, 
spealdng  of  righteous  things  now  talh  of  ichat  is  unrighteous  1 
(x.  10^).  The  plur.  of  personal  pronouns  is  also  occasionally 
used  in  a  similar  way  ;  thus  in  the  dialogue  of  Yama  and 
YamT  (x.  10*)  nas  alternates  with  the  correct  nau  :  sa  no 
nabhih,  paramam  jami  tan  nau  that  is  our  bond  of  union, 
that  our  highest  kinship.  This  occasional  looseness  is  probably 
due  to  the  situation  for  the  moment  being  regaided  more 
generally  so  as  to  include  others  ;  u^e  would  then  mean  I  and 
those  present,  we  tu-o  and  others  in  liJce  circumstances.  In  B. 
the  use  of  the  pi.  for  the  sing,  of  the  first  pers.  of  the 
personal  pronoun  is  not  infrequent  both  when  the  pronoun 
is  expressed  and  when  it  is  latent  in  the  verb ;  e.  g.  sa  ha^ 
uvaea :  namo  vayam  brahmisthaya  kurmah  he  replied  : 
ire  {—  1)  shoiv  reverence  to  the  most  learned  wfawfSB.) ;  varam 
bhavate  gautamaya  dadmah  we  (=  I,  Jaivali)  offer  a  hoon 
to  his  Honour  Gautama  (SB.). 

Concord. 

194.  The  rules  of  concord  in  case,  person,  gender,  and 
number  are  in  general  the  same  as  in  other  inflexional 
languages. 


^  To  this  iitse  is  probaljly  due  the  conception  of  tlie  three  heavens 
and  three  earths  in  Vedic  cosmology. 


194]  COXCOED  289 

A.  1.  To  the  rule  that  the  verb  agrees  with  its  sub- 
stantive in  person  and  number  the  exceptions  are  very  rare. 
Thus  the  sing,  of  the  word  tva  many,  having  a  pi.  sense, 
appears  once  with  a  pi.  verb  :  jay  an  u  tvo  juhvati  many  a 
one  sacrifices  for  victories  (MS.).  On  the  other  hand,  there 
are  a  few  examples  in  the  RV.  of  a  neut.  pi.  taking  a  verb 
in  the  sing.  ;  e.  g.  dhrsnave  dhiyate  dhana  to  the  hold  man 
booty  accrues  (i.  8P). 

2.  a.  When  two  sing,  subjects  have  one  verb,  the  latter  in 
most  cases  is  in  the  dual ;  e.  g.  indras  ca  yad  yuyudhate 
ahis  ca  when  Indra  and  the  dragon  fought  (i.  32^''^) ;  urjam 
no  dyaus  ca  prthivi  ca  pinvatam  may  heaven  and  earths 
increase  our  strength  (vi.  70'') ;  indras  ca  somam  pibatam 
brhaspate  do  ye  tiro,  Indra  and  {thou),  0  Brhaspati,  drink  Soma 
(iv.  50^'^). 

When  one  only  of  two  subjects  is  expressed,  the  other 
liaving  to  be  supplied,  the  verb  is  also  in  the  dual  ;  e.  g. 
a  yad  indras  ca  dadvahe  ivhcn  (I)  and  Indra  receive 
(viii.  34^'^) ;  brhaspate  yuvam  indras  ca  vasvo  divyasya^ 
isathe  0  Brhaspaii,  ye  two,  (thou)  and  Indra,  dispose  of 
heavenly  wealth  (vii.  97^°).  In  B.  this  usage  seems  to  be 
found  only  when  the  verb  is  in  the  third  person;  e.g. 
prajapatih  praja  asrjata  :  ta  brhaspatis  ca^anvavaitani 
Prajapati  created  beings:  (he)  and  B rhaspati  followed  them  (TS.). 

a.  In  a  minority  of  cases  two  sing,  subjects  take  a  sing,  verb  when 
they  are  equivalent  in  sense  to  a  dn.  compound  ;  e.g.  tokdm  ca  tdsya 
tdimysm  ca  vardhate  his  offspring  and  famihj  prosper  (ii.  25'). 

P.  In  B.  when  two  sing,  subjects  are  connected  by  ca  the  verb  is 
in  the  du.  ;  but  if  a  contrast  is  intended,  in  the  sing.  ;  e.g.  tdsya 
dhata  ca^aryama  ca^ajayetam  from  her  Bhalr  and  Anjaman  were  hmn 
(MS.)  ;  but  prthivya  vdi  m^dhyam  cav^amedhyd.m  ca  vyud  akramat 
from  the  earth  there  issued  on  the  one  hand  the  pure  and  on  the  other  the 
impure  (MS.). 

b.  When  there  are  more  than  two  subjects  the  verb  is  not 

necessarily  in  the  pi.,  but  may  agree  with  only  one  of  them. 

1.  If  each  of  the  subjects  is  sing,  the  verb  is  sing.  ;  e.  g. 

1819  U 


290  OUTLINES   OF   SYNTAX  [194 

mitras  tan  no  varuno  rodasi  ca  dyubhaktam  indro 
aryama  dadatu  let  Mifra,  Varum,  Eodasl,  Indra  and 
Aryamayi  give  us  this  divine  wealth  (vii.  40^). 

2.  If  the  subjects  are  of  different  numbers  the  verb  may- 
agree  with  either  one  or  the  other ;  e.  g.  avad  indram 
yamuna  trtsavas  ca  Yamuna  and  the  Trtsus  helped  Indra 
(vii.  18^^) ;  indro  vidur  angirasas  ca  Indra  and  the  Angirases 
Mow  it  (x.  108^0). 

Tlie  du.  and  pi.  take  the  du.  or  the  pi.  ;  e.  g.  girayas  ca 
drlha  dyava  ca  bhuma  tujete  the  firm  mountains  and  heaven 
and  earth  trembled  (i.  61^^) ;  dyava  ca  yatra  pipayann  aha 
ca  where  heaven  and  earth  and  the  daijs  have  given  almndance 
(vii.  652). 

a.  In  B.  a  sing,  and  a  du.  subject  take  a  verb  in  the  sing,  or  jil.  ; 
0.  g.  vyamamatr^u  paksau  ca  pticham  ca  bhavati  hoik  the  wings  and 
the  tail  are  a  fathom  in  length  (TS.)  ;  tav  asvinau  ca  sfirasvati  ea^apam 
phendin  vdjram  asincan  the  As'vins  and  Sa7-asvat't  moulded  the  foam  of  the 
'Waters  into  a  holt  (SFj.)  ;  a  sing,  and  a  pi.  take  the  verb  in  the  pi. ;  e.  g. 
devas  ca  vdi  yamds  ca^_^asmin  loke  'spardhanta  the  gods  and  Yama 
fought  for  (the  possession  of)  this  world  (TS.). 

jS.  In  B.  anyo  'nyd  one  another  takes  the  verb  in  the  sing.,  du.,  or 
l^l.  according  as  one.  two,  or  several  agents  are  intended ;  e.  g. 
tabhyah  s&  nfr  rchad  yo  nah  prathamo  'nyo  'nyasmai  druhyat  of  these 
he  shall  he  deprived  who  first  of  us  mag  cheat  another  vTS.)  ;  ned  anyo  'nySm 
hin^satah  lest  they  injure  each  other  (SB.) ;  tani  srstany  anyo  'nyena^ 
aspardhanta  being  created  they  fought  with  one  another  (SB.). 

3.  When  two  or  more  subjects  of  different  persons  take  a 
verb  in  the  du.  or  pi.  the  first  person  is  preferred  to  the 
second  or  third,  the  second  to  the  third ;  e.  g.  aham  ca 
tvam  ca  sam  yujyava  land  thou  will  unite  together  (viii.  62^^) ; 
tarn  yuyam  vayam  ca^asyama  may  you  and  we  obtain  him 
(ix,  98^'^).  Occasionally,  however,  the  third  person  is  pre- 
ferred to  the  first ;  e.  g.  ami  ca  y6  maghavano  vayam  ca 
miham  na  suro  ati  nis  tatanyuh  m,ay  these  patrons  and  we 
pierce,  through  as  the  sun  the  mist  (i.  141^^). 

E.  1.  An  attributive  adjective  agrees  with  its  substantive 
in   gender,    number,    and    case.      The   exceptions   are   few 


194]  CONCORD  291 

and   unimportant,   being   chiefly  due   to  the  exigencies  of 
metre. 

a.  The  cardinals  from  five  to  nineteen,  being  adjectives,  show  some 
peculiarities  of  concord  :  in  the  oblique  cases  they  appear  in  V.  not 
only  in  their  inflected  form,  but  often  also  the  uninflected  form  of 
the  noni.  and  ace.  ;  e.  g.  saptabhih  putrdih  and  saptd  hotrbhih, 
pancd.su  jd,nesu  and  pdnca  krstisu.  In  B.  only  the  inflected  forms 
are  used. 

h.  The  cardinals  from  20  upwards  being  substantives  in  form  may 
govern  a  G.  ;  e.g.  sastim  dsvanam  sixty  horses,  satd.m  gonam  a  hundred 
kine,  sahdsrani  gdvani  thousands  of  kine.  They  are,  however,  generally 
ti'eated  like  adjectives  ;  but  being  collectives  they  take  sing,  endings 
in  concord  with  pi.  cases  ;  e.  g.  trinisd,d  devah.  thirty  gods,  trimsdtam 
yojanani  thirty  yojanas  (ace),  trirasata  h^ribhih  ivith  thirty  bays,  tra- 
yastrimsato  devBuara  of  thirty  gods  (AB.).  satdm  hundred  and  sah^sram 
thousand  are  used  as  the  nom.  ace.  form  in  agreement  with  plurals  ; 
e.  g.  satdm  piirah  a  hundred  forts,  sah^sram  hdrayah  a  thousand  bays, 
sahasram  pasian  a  thousand  beasts  (TS.)  ;  they  also  appear  in  the  same 
sense  in  tlie  plural  ;  e.g.  sata  piirah  a  hundred  forts,  sahd,srany  ddhi- 
rathani  a  thousand  ivagon  loads  (x.  98^).  sat^m  and  sahdsram  are  also 
found  (but  not  in  B.)  with  an  inst.  pi.,  as  satam  purbhih  with  a 
hundred  forts  beside  satena  h^ribhih  i«i7/«  a  hundred  bays,  sahasram  rsibhih 
iviih  a  thousand  seers.  The  noun  accompanying  sahisra  occasionally 
appears  by  a  kind  of  attraction  in  the  sing. :  sunas  cic  eh^pam 
nlditam  sahdsrad  yupad  amuncah  thou  didst  deliver  BunaMepa,  xclio  teas 
bound,  from  a  thousand  posts  (v.  2'^),:  this  use  does  not  seem  to  occur 
in  B. 

2.  A  predicative  adjective  used  with  as  or  bhu  (often  to 
be  supplied)  agrees  in  gender  and  number  with  its  subject. 

a.  The  nom.  of  isvara  capable  vised  thus  in  B.  is  equivalent  to 
a  verb  =  be  able.  The  concord  here  is  in  the  majority  of  cases  normal ; 
e.  g.  isvaro  va  dsvo  'yato  'pratisthitah  pdram  paravdtam  gdntoh 
a  horse  if  unbridled  and  unobstructed  can  go  to  an  extreme  distance  (TS.) ; 
sa^enam  isvara  praddhah  she  can  burn  him  (TS.);  isvarfiu  va  et^u 
nirddhah  both  of  them  can  burn  (SB. ) ;  tany  enara  isvarani  pratinudah 
tliey  can  drive  him  away  (MS.).  Sometimes,  however,  the  concox'd  of 
either  number  or  gender,  or  of  both,  is  neglected  ;  e.  g.  tarn  isvarfim 
r^ksamsi  hdntoh  the  demons  can  kill  him  (TS.)  ;  t^sya^isvardh  praja 
papiyasi  bh^vitoh  his  offspring  can  degenerate  (SB.)  ;  isvaro  ha^eta 
^nagnicitam  samtaptoh  these  (f.  pi.)  are  liable  to  weigh  heavily  upon  one 
who  has  not  built  a  fire  altar  (SB.).     In  the  last  two  examples  quoted 

u2 


292  OUTLINES   OF   SYNTAX  [194-195 

and  in  otliers  the  masc.  sing,  has  become  stereotyped  as  a  nom.  of  all 
genders  and  numbers. 

b.  The  use  of  a  predicative  adjective  referring  to  two  or  more 
substantives  differing  in  gender  is  very  rare  ;  it  then  seems  to  agree 
in  gender  with  the  subst.  nearest  it,  or  the  niasc.  seems  to  have  been 
preferred  to  the  neut. ;  e.  g.  traya  vdi  ndirrta  aksah  striyah  sv^pnab 
(^MS.)  (Jice,  women,  and  deep  (are)  the  treble  pernicious  (things)  ;  eva  hy 
asya  kamya  stoma  ukth&m  ca  sarnsya  thus  indeed  his  two  favourites, 
stoma  and  vktha,  are  to  be  recited  (i.  8'";.  A  predicative  adj.  dependent 
on  kr  agrees  with  its  subst.  ;  if  there  are  two,  the  du.  is  used  ;  e.g. 
ddivlm  ca  vavd^asma  etd.d  visam  manusim  ca^fi,nuvartmanau  karoti 
so  he  makes  the  divine  and  the  Mimanfolk  obedient  to  him  (MS.\ 


3.  As  in  Greek  and  Latin,  a  demonstrative  pronoun 
agrees  with  a  predicative  noun  in  gender  and  number ;  e.  g. 
ye  tnsah  sa  tvak  tvJiat  (are)  the  husJcs  {that  =)  those  (are)  the 
ski)}  (AB.);  yad  asm  samksaritam  asit  tani  vayamsi^ 
abhavan  what  teas  the  concentrated  tear  {those  =)  that  became 
the  birds  (SB.). 

Pronouns. 

195.  A.  Personal,  a.  Owing  to  its  highly  inflexional 
character  the  Vedic  language,  like  Latin  and  Greek,  uses 
the  nominatives  of  personal  pronouns  far  less  frequently 
than  modern  European  languages  do.  Being  already  inherent 
in  the  first  and  second  persons  of  the  finite  verb  such 
pronouns  are  expressed  separately  only  when  they  require 
emphasizing. 

b.  The  unaccented  forms  of  aham  and  tvam  (109  a)  being 
enclitic,  can  be  used  neither  at  the  beginning  of  a  sentence 
or  metrical  line  (Pada),  nor  after  vocatives,  nor  before  em- 
phasizing, conjunctive  or  disjunctive  pai"ticles. 

e.  Bhavan  Your  Honour,  the  polite  form  of  tvam,  which 
first  comes  into  use  in  B.,  properly  takes  a  verb  in  the 
3.  sing.  But  being  practically  equivalent  to  a  personal 
pronoun  of  the  2.  pers.,  it  occasionally  appears  with  a  verb 
in   that   person ;    e.  g.   iti   vava   kila   no   bhavan   pura^ 


195]  PRONOUNS  293 

anusistan  avocah  (SB.)  in  this  sense  then  you  Jmve  formerly 
spoken  of  {us  =)  me  as  instructed  (cp.  194,  1). 

B.  Demonstrative.  1.  ayam  tliis  {here)  is  a  deictic 
pronoun  used  adjectivally  of  what  is  in  the  neighbourhood, 
presence,  or  possession  of  the  speaker,  and  may  often  be 
translated  by  here ;  e.  g.  ayam  ta  emi  tanva  purastat  here 
I  come  tvith  my  body  before  thee  (viii.  100^) ;  iyam  matir 
mama  this  my  hymn  ;  ayam  vatah  the  loind  here  (on  earth) ; 
ayam  janah  the  peo])le  here  (vii.  55^) ;  idam  bhuvanam  this 
ivorld  ;  ayam  agnih  Agni  here  (present).  In  the  RV.  ayam  is 
sometimes  used  even  with  dlv  heaven  and  aditya  sun  as  if 
they  were  included  in  the  environment  of  the  speaker. 

2.  Opposed  to  ayam  is  asau  that  {there),  applied  to  objects 
remote  from  the  speaker,  as  heaven  and  its  phenomena, 
immortals,  persons  who  are  not  present  or  are  at  a  distance  ; 
e.  g.  ami  ye  deva  sthana  trisu^a  rocan6  divah  ye,  0  gods, 
who  are  there,  in  the  three  bright  realms  of  heaven  (i.  105-^) ; 
ami  ca  ye  maghavano  vayara  ca  tltose  (absent)  patrons  and- 
we  (i.  141^^) ;  asau  yd  6si  virakah  you  tvho  go  there,  a 
mannikin  (viii.  91'^). 

rt.  In  B.  the  usage  is  similar,  only  the  contrast  is  more  definite  : 
it  is  typical  in  referring  to  the  earth  (ijram)  and  tlie  heavenly  world 
(asdu%  and  in  the  phrases  yo  'yam  pavate  he  tvho  blows  here  ( =Wind), 
and  yo  's^u  tapati  he  ivho  burns  there  ( =Sun),  and  asav  adityah.  the  sun 
thire.  In  B.  asdu  is  besides  used  in  a  formulaic  way  {=  so  and  so) 
when  the  actual  name  is  to  be  substituted  ;  e.  g.  asau  naina^_^aydm 
idd.niriipah  he  here,  having  this  form,  is  so  and  so  by  name  (SB.).  In 
addressing  a  person  the  voc.  form  £sau  is  also  used  thus  :  yatha  va 
iddm  namagraham  ^sa  asa  iti  hvdyati  as  one  here  (=  in  ordinary  life) 
by  waij  of  mention imj  the  name  calls  :  '  yon  there,  you  there  '  (MS.). 

3.  ta,  like  asau,  can  be  translated  by  that,  but  in  a  different 
sense.  It  is  not  like  asau  essentially  deictic  and  local,  nor 
does  it  imply  a  contrast  {that  there  as  opposed  to  this  here) ; 
but  it  refers  to  something  already  known  either  as  just 
mentioned  or  as  generally  familiar. 

rt.    A  very  frequent  application   of  this  meaning  is  its 


294  OUTLINES   OF   SYNTAX  [195 

reference  as  a  correlative  to  what  is  made  known  by  an 
antecedent  relative  clause  ;  e.g.  yam  yajnarn  paribhur  asi, 
sa  id  dev6su  gaehati  the  sacrifice  that  thou  encomjpassest,  that 
certainly  goes  to  the  gods  (i.  1^).  Often,  however,  an  ante- 
cedent clause  is  lacking  and  must  be  mentally  supplied  in 
some  such  form  as  whom  we  have  in  mind.  Then  ta  is 
equivalent  to  tlic  well  Jcnotvn.  This  use  comes  out  most 
clearly  in  the  first  verse  of  a  hymn  ;  e.  g.  sa  pratnatha 
sahasa  jayamanah,  sadyah  kavyani  bal  adhatta  visva 
(i.  96^)  he  (who  is  in  our  thoughts,  the  famous  Agni)  being 
engendered  in  the  ancient  way  ivith  strength,  lo !  has  straighttvay 
assumed  all  tvisdom  ;  ta  vam  visvasya  gopa  yajase  (viii.  25') 
you  two  famous  guardians  of  the  universe  I  worship). 

h.  ta  has  a  very  frequent  anaphoric  use,  referring  back 
to  a  noun  or  a  pronoun  of  the  third  or  second  person  (in  B. 
also  of  the  first),  and  may  then  be  translated  by  as  such,  so ; 
e.  g.  tvam  vajasya  sriityasya  rajasi :  sa  no  mrla  thou 
ntlest  over  glorious  sjjoil :  as  such  be  gracious  to  us  (i.  36'") ; 
sa  tatha^ity  abravit :  sa  vai  vo  varam  vrna  iti  she  said, 
yes  :  I  as  such  {=  in  the  proposed  circumstances)  tvill  choose 
a  boon  of  you  (AB.).  This  usage  is  a  prominent  and  some- 
what monotonous  feature  of  the  narrative  style  in  B.  ;  e.  g. 
prajapates  trayastrmsad  duhitara  asan,  tah  somaya 
rajne  'dadat,  tasam  rohinim  upait,  ta  irsyantih  piinar 
agachan  Prajapati  had  thirty  daughters ;  lie  gave  them  to  King 
Soma ;  of  them  he  visited  Bohim  (only) ;  they  (the  others), 
being  jealous,  went  bach  (TS.).  When  this  ta  is  widely 
separated  from  the  antecedent  noun  to  which  it  refers 
(sometimes  only  indirectly)  it  may  be  translated  by  the 
definite  article  ;  thus  the  opening  of  the  story  of  Urvasi : 
urvasi  ha^apsarah  pururavasam  aidarn  cakame  an 
Apsaras  Urva§l  loved  Pwruravas,  the  son  of  Ida  is  some 
sentences  later  referred  to  with :  tad  dha  ta  apsarasa 
atayo  bhutva  pari  pupluvire  then  the  Apsarases  swam  about 

r 

in  the  form  of  water  birds  (SB,). 


105]  PRONOUNS  295 

a.  In  its  anaphoric  use  ta  is  frequently  followed  by  personal  pronouns 
of  all  persons  (regularly  in  their  enclitic  form  when  they  have  one) ; 
o.  g.  td.m  ma  sdm  srja  varcasa  unUe  me  as  such  with  glory  (i.  23-^^,  mam 
yajnad  antdr  agata :  sa  vo  'h^m  evd  yajiifim  amiimuham  ye  have  excluded 
mo  f null  the  sacrijice ;  so  I  have  thrown  your  sucrifce  inio  confusion  (SB.)  ; 
havismanto  vidhema  te  :  &&  tv^rn  no  ady4  sumdna  ih^^avita  bhdva 
brintjing  oblations  lue  looidd  serve  thee  :  so  do  thou  be  for  tis  to-day  a  benevolent 
hJper  (i.  36=)  ;  yd,di  tva^etdt  punar  brdvatah,  sa  tvdm  brutat  (6b.) 
'/  they  {two)  shall  say  this  to  you  again,  then  do  you  say  (to  them)  ;  asya 
pitva  ghano  vrtranam  abhavas  .  .  .  tdm  tva  vajayamah  hewing  drunk 
of  this  thou  becamest  a  slayer  of  Vrtras  :  so  ice  strengthen  thee  i  i.  4"),  Similarly 
ubcd  are :  sing.  A.  tarn  tvam  (here  exceptionally  not  enclitic), 
D.  tasmai  te,  G.  tdsya  te,  tdsyas  te  ;  du.  ta  vam ;  pi.  A.  tan  vas, 
G.  t6sam  vas. 

p.  Four  demonstrative  pronouns  are  found  following  ta  in  this 
way  :  idam,  adds,  td  itself,  and  oftenest  of  all  etad  ;  e.  g.  sa^iydm 
asme  sanaja  pitrya  dhih  this  here  is  among  us  an  ancient  hymn  of  our 
forefathers  (iii.  39=) ;  tfisya  valo  uy  asanji :  t£m  amum  vato  dhunoti 
its  tail  hangs  doion :  that  the  wind  tosses  to  and  fro  (SB.)  ;  tam  ha^eva 
n&^diti  dadaha :  tam  ha  sma  tam  pura  brahmana  nd  taranti  that 
(river)  he  (Agni)  did  not  burn  across :  that  same  one  the  Bruhmans  used  not 
formerly  to  cross  (SB.),  bhavaty  asya^anucaro  ya  evam  veda  :  sa  va 
esa  ekatithih,  sa  esa  juhvatsu  vasati  he  icho  knows  this  has  a  follower ; 
that  (follower)  is  this  one  guest ;  this  same  (followei-,  the  Sun)  abides 
among  the  sacrificers  (AB.). 

7.  The  N.  sing.  s&  is  sometimes  used  adverbially  in  B.  (see  180, 
p.  249). 

4.  eta  this  is  used  like  ta  but  is  more  emphatic.  It  refers 
to  something  known  to  the  listener  as  present  either  to  his 
senses  or  his  thoughts. 

a.  The  correlative  use  of  eta  seems  to  be  limited  to  B., 
the  relative  clause  here  usually  following ;  e.  g.  patho  va 
esa  praiti,  yo  yajne  muhyati  lie  diverges  from  the  f)ath  who 
goes  wrong  in  the  sacrifice  (AB.).  It  is  somewhat  peculiar 
when  the  relative  in  the  neuter  sing,  and  without  a  verb  is 
added  solely  for  the  purpose  of  emphasizing  a  particular 
word  ;  e.  g.  svargam  va  etena  lokam  upapra  yanti  yat 
prayaniy ah  2)eqp?e  go  to  tJie  heavenJg  world  with  that  which  (is) 
the  lireliminary  sacrifice  (AB.).  In  these  circumstances  eta 
when  alone  always  agrees  in  gender  with  the  noun  in  the 


29G  OUTLINES   OF  SYNTAX  [i95 

relative  clause  ;  but  when  it  is  accompanied  by  a  substantive, 
with  the  latter ;  e.  g.  pasavo  va  ete  yad  apah  water  is 
equivalent  to  cattle  (AB.).  In  this  usage  yad  often  loses  its 
inflexional  character  to  such  an  extent  that  it  becomes  like 
an  explanatory  particle  (=  that  is  to  say),  the  substantive 
that  follows  it  agreeing  in  case  \vith  that  which  precedes  ; 
e.  g.  etair  atra^ubhayair  artho  bhavati  yad  devais  ca 
brahmanais  ca  there  is  need  here  of  both,  that  is,  of  the  gods 
and  the  Brahman s  (SB.). 

The  use  of  eta  without  an  antecedent,  parallel  to  that  of 
ta,  is  common  both  in  V.  and  B.  ;  o.  g.  eso  usa  vy  iichati 
this  Dawn  (whom  Ave  see  before  us)  has  shone  forth  (i.  46')  ; 
te  ha^asura  asuyanta  iva^^ueur :  yavad  evaisa  visnur 
abhis6te  tavad  vo  dadma  iti  the  Asuras  said  someivhat 
displeased :  as  much  as  this  Vismi  (here  present)  covers  lying 
doivn,  so  much  we  give  you  (SB,) ;  yuvam  etarn  cakrathuh. 
sindhusu  plavam  ye  two  have  made  that  l)oat  (present  to  our 
thought)  in  the  ocean  (i.  182^) ;  t^na^etam  uttaram  girim 
ati  dudrava  therewith  he  passed  over  that  (well  known) 
northern  mountain  (SB.) ;  ta  ete  maye  asrjanta  suparnim 
ca  kadrum  ca  they  created  these  two  (well-known)  miracidous 
heings,  Siiparn'i  and  Kadrfi  (SB.).  In  the  last  example  ete 
requires  the  addition  of  the  two  following  names  to  supj^le- 
ment  its  sense. 

a.  Somewhat  bimilarly  this  pronoun  is  sometimes  followed  in  B. 
by  v/oi-ds  or  a  sentence  explaining  it  ;  e.g.  sa  etabhir  dev^tabhih 
sayug  bhutva  marudbhir  visa^agnina^d,nikena,_^upaplayata  he,  lutUed 
with  these  deities,  ihe  Martiis  us  the  flghling  folk  and  Agni  us  the  heud, 
approached  (MS.)  ;  sd  ha,^etd,d  eva  dadarsa  :^^anasanataya  vdi  ni3 
prajah  p^ra  bhavanti^iti  he  saw  tliis :  in  consequence  of  hunger  vnj 
creatures  ure  perishing  (SB.). 

h.  In  its  anaphoric  use  eta  expresses  identity  with  that 
to  which  it  refers  back,  more  emphatically  than  ta  does  ; 
e.  g.  apeta  vita  vi  ca  sarpata^ato :  asma  etam  pitaro 
lokam  akran  go  away,  disperse,  depart  from  hence  :  this  pilacc 


195]  PKONOUNS  207 

(oh  which  you  have  been  standing)  the  fathers  have  pre- 
pared for  him  (x.  14") ;  in  the  final  verse  the  expression  esa 
stoma  indra  tubhyam  (i.  173')  tills  praise  is  for  thee,  0  Tiiclra, 
refers  to  the  whole  i^receding  hymn  ;  tad  ubhayam  sam- 
bhrtya  mrdam  ca^apas  ca^istakam  akurvams  :  tasmad 
etad  ubhayam  istaka  bhavati  mrc  ca^apas  ea  having 
hrought  both  those  together,  clay  and  water,  they  made  the  hricJc  : 
therefore  a  hrieJc  consists  of  both  these,  clay  and  water  (SB. ). 

5.  tya  occurs  only  in  the  sense  of  that  {well  hnown) ;  e.  g. 
kva  tyani  nau  sakhya  babhuvuh  what  has  hecome  of  those 
friendships  of  us  two  ?  (vii.  88^).  It  often  follows  forms  of 
the  demonstrative  pronouns  eta  and  idam  ;  e.  g.  et6  ty6 
bhanava  usasa  aguh  here  those  (familiar)  beams  of  Daion 
have  come  (vii.  75^) ;  imam  u  tyam  atharvavad  agnim 
manthanti  they,  like  Atharvan,  rub  forth  that  (famous)  Agni 
here  (vi.  15").  The  neuter  tyad  is  sometimes  used  after  the 
relative  yd,  and  often  after. the  particle  ha,  in  an  adverbial 
sense  ;  e.  g.  yasya  tyac  chambaram  m.ade  divodasaya 
randhayah  in  the  exhilaration  of  which  (Soma)  thou  didst  tit 
that  tone  subject  Sambara  to  Divoddsa  (vi.  43'). 

6.  The  pronoun  a  tliat  in  its  substantive  sense  (=  he,  she, 
it,  they),  when  it  is  unaccented,  not  infrequently  appears  as 
an  unemphatic  correlative  (while  the  accented  form  is  a 
deictic  adjective) ;  e.  g.  yasya  devair  asado  barhir  agne, 
ahani  asmai  sudina  bhavanti  on  whose  litter  thou,  0  Agni, 
hast  sat  down,  fair  days  arise  for  him  (vii,  11-);  ya  vam 
satam  niyutah  saeante,  abhir  yatam  arvak  the  hundred 
teams  that  accompany  you,  tvith  them  do  ye  two  come  hither 
(vii,  91") ;  nakir  esam  nindita  martyesu,  y6  asmakam 
pitaro  gosu  yodhah.  there  is  among  mortals  no  reproacher  of 
them  who,  (being)  our  fathers,  were  fighters  for  cows  (iii.  89^). 


298  OUTLINES   OF   SYNTAX  [196 

THE    CASES. 

Nominative. 

196.  The  nominative,  as  in  other  languages,  is  mainly 
used  as  the  subject  of  a  sentence. 

a.  A  second  nominative  is  employed  as  a  predicate 
with  certain  verbs  beside  the  subject,  that  is,  with  verbs 
meaning  le,  become,  seem  or  he  accounted,  tJiinlc  oneself;  e.  g. 
tvam  hi  ratnadha  asi  for  thou  art  a  hcstower  of  treasure 
(i.  153) .  ^ivasah  santo  asiva  abhuvan  heiur/  friendli/  they 
have  become  unfriendhj  (v.  \2^  ;  dkavimsatih  sam  padyante 
they  become  twenty-one  (TS.);'  gokama  me  achadayan  they 
seemed  to  me  desirous  of  cons  (x.  108^") ;  rsih  ko  vipra  ohate 
icho  counts  as  a  seer,  as  a  singer?  (viii.  3^^j ;  apratir  manya- 
manah.  thinking  himself  irresistible  (v.  323) .  somam  manyate 
papivan  he  believes  he  has  drunlc  Soma  (x.  85^) ;  parabhavis- 
yanto  manamahe  /ce  think  we  are  about  to  perish  (TS.). 

a.  In  B.  the  predicative  nom.  also  appears  with  verbs  meaning  tu 
call  oneself  (hrii,  vac,  vad  in  the  middle) ;  e.  g.  indro  brahmano 
bruvandh  Indra  calling  himself  a  Brahman  (.TB.)  ;  hantavocathah  thou 
hast  described  thyself  as  a  slayer  (TS.). 

/3.  With  verbs  of  naming  the  predicative  ace.  may  also  be  expressed 
iu  B.  by  the  nom.  with  iti  ;  e.  g.  rasabha  iti  hy  etam  fsayo  'vadan 
for  the  seers  called  him  ^ass'  (TS.\ 

b.  With  passive  verbs  the  predicative  nom.  takes  the 
place  of  the  ace.  object  of  the  active  verb  ;  e.  g.  tvam  .  . 
ucyase  pita  thou  art  called  a  father  (i.  31'^). 

c.  Instead  of  the  predicative  nom.  the  voc.  is  sometimes 
used  ;  e.  g.  yiiyam  hi  stha,  sudanavah  for  ye  are  liberal 
(i.  15'-) ;  abhur  eko,  rayipate  rayinam  thou  alone  hast  been 


1  In  B.  the  phrase  rup^m  kr  to  assume  a  form,  because  it  is  equiva- 
lent to  bhu  become,  takes  a  predicative  nom.  ;  e.g.  visnu  rupam  krtva 
assumimj  the  form  of  Visnu  (TS.). 


196-197]  ACCUSATIVE   CASE  299 

the  lord  of  riches  (vi.  SV) ;  gautama  bruvana  thou  icho  caltest 
thi/self  Gautama  (SB.).     (Cp.  180  under  na,  2  a.) 

o.  Since  apparently  two  vocatives  cannot  be  connected  with  ca,  the 
nora.  often  apjieai-s  instead  of  the  first  or  tlie  second  vocative  ;  e.  g. 
vayav  indras  ca  cetathah  0  Vdyn  and  India,  ye  know  (i.  2'')  ;  indras  ca 
somam  pibatam  brhaspate  InUraand  Brhaspati,  drink  ike  Suma  (iv.  50^''), 
Cp.  ISO  under  ca,  1  a,  h. 


Accusative. 

197.  A.  This  case  is  usually  employed  in  connexion 
with  verbs  in  various  ways.  Besides  its  ordinary  use  of 
denoting  the  object  of  transitive  verbs,  the  ace.  is  employed 
to  express  : 

1.  the  goal  with  verbs  of  motion,  chiefly  gam,  also  1, 
much  less  often  ya,  car,  and  sr  and  some  others.  The  ace. 
may  be  a  person,  a  place,  an  activity  or  a  condition  ;  e.  g. 
yamam  ha  yajno  gachati  to  Yania  goes  the  sacrifice  (x.  14^^) ; 
devam  id  esi  pathibhih  sug6bhih  to  the  gods  thou  goest  l>y 
paths  easy  to  traverse  (i.  162''^^) ;  indram  stomas  caranti 
to  Indra  fare  t/te  songs  of  praise  (x.  47');  saraj  jaro  na 
yosanam  he  sped  like  a  lover  to  a  maiden  (ix.  lOP'*) ;  ma  tvat 
ksetrany  aranani  ganma  may  we  not  go  from  thee  to  strange 
fields  (vi.  61^^) ;  sabham  eti  kitavah  tlic  gambler  goes  to  the 
assembly  (x.  34'^) ;  jaritiir  gachatho  havam  ye  two  go  to  the  call 
of  the  singer  (viii.  35^ ') ;  tava  kratubhir  amrtatvam  ayan  by 
thy  mental 2)oicers  they  [went  to  =)  attained  immortality  (vi.  7^^). 

a.  Tlie  usage  in  13.  is  similar;  e.g.  prajapatih  praja  asrjata,  ta 
varunam  agachan  Prajdpati  cieated  creatures  ;  iliey  icent  to  Varuna  (TS.)  ; 
s^  nd  divam  apatat  he  did  not  fly  to  heaven  (SB.);  sriyam  gacheyam 
may  I  {go  to  =)  attain  prosperity  (SB.). 

2.  duration  of  time  (in  origin  only  a  special  form  of  the 
cognate  ace.) ;  e.  g.  satam  jiva  sarado  vardhamanab  live 
Xyrospering  a  hundred  autumns  (x.  161^) ;  so  asvatth6  sam- 
vatsaram  atisthat  he  remained  in  the  Asvattha  tree  for  a  year 


300  OUTLINES   OF  SYNTAX  [197 

(TB.) ;  tasmat  sarvan  rtun  varsati  therefore  it  rains  durimj 
all  the  seasons  (TS.) ;  samvatsaratamim  ratrim  a  gachatat 
(SB.)/o>-  the  night  a  year  Jtence  thou  shalt  come  (to  me). 

3.  extension  of  distance  (in  origin  only  a  special  form 
of  the  cognate  ace),  a  use  rare  in  both  V.  and  B.  ;  e.  g.  yad 
asiibhih  patasi  yojana  puru  when  with  the  swift  ones  thou 
fliest  mamj  leagues  (ii.  16 ') ;  sa  bhumim  visvato  vrtva^aty 
atisthad  dasangulam  lie  covering  the  earth  on  all  sides 
extended  heyond  (it)  a  distance  of  ten  fingers  (x.  90^) ;  sapta- 
dasa  pravyadhan  ajim  dhavanti  they  run  a  race  (a  distance 
of)  seventeen  arrow-fligltts  (TB.). 

4.  the  cognate  object  of  intransitive  verbs,  which  may 
be  allied  to  the  latter  etyniologically  or  only  in  sense ;  e.  g. 
samanam  anji^anjate  they  deck  themselves  with  like  adorn- 
ment (vii.  57^) ;  yad  ague  yasi  dutyam  when,  0  Agni,  thou 
goest  on  a  message  (i.  12^) ;  tvaya^adhyaksena  prtana 
jayema  with  thee  as  witness  we  would  compter  in  battles 
(x.  128^) ;  tasmad  raja  samgramam  jitva^udajam  aid  ajate 
therefore  a  ling,  having  won  a  battle,  chooses  Ijooty  for  himself 
(MS.) ;  tisro  ratrir  vratam  caret  he  si lould  perform-  a  fast  for 
three  nights  (TS.). 

a.  Verbs  meaning  to  stream  or  to  shine  in  V.  take  a  cognate  ace.  with 
a  concrete  sense ;  e.  g.  rtasya  jihva  pavate  md,dhu  the  tongue  of  the  rite 
(Soma)  streams  mead  (ix.  75^),  tdsma  apo  ghrtd.m  arsanti  /or  him  the 
loaters  stream  ghee  (i.  1255),  vi  yat  suryo  na  rocate  brhdd  bhah  ichen, 
like  the  sun,  he  beams  forth  loftij  light  (vii.  8*). 

5.  an  adverbial  sense.  Adverbs  of  this  form  all  originated 
in  various  uses  of  the  ace.  which  have  acquired  an  indepen- 
dent character.     They  are  formed  from  : 

a.  substantives  ;  e.  g.  naktam  by  night  (not  during  the 
night  like  the  ace.  of  time) ;  kamam  at  icill  (still  rare  in  the 
EV.),  e.g.  kamam  tad  dhota  samsed  yad  dhotrakah 
pnrvedyuh  samseyuh  the  Hotr  may,  as  he  likes,  recite  what 
the  assistants  of  the  Hotr  may  recite  the  day  before  (AB.) ; 
nama  by  name;    e.g.  mam  dhur  indram   nama   devata 


197]  ACCUSATIVE  .301 

(x.  49^^)  me  they  7iave  placed  as  Indra  hi/  name  (or  verihf)  amovg 
the  pods. 

1).  various  kinds  of  adjectives.  They  have  an  attributive 
origin  when  they  express  the  senses  of  qukldy  or  slowly 
(ksipram,  ciram),  onuch  or  greatli/  (bahii,  balavat),  ivell  or 
l)adl//,  holdhj  (dhrsnu),  or  direction  (as  nyak  doivnward,  &c.)  ; 
e.  g.  balavad  vati  it  hloivs  hard  (SB.) ;  bhadram  jivantah 
living  happily  (x.  37^). 

a.  The  ace.  adverbs  from  ordinals  seem  to  have  been  appositional 
in  origin  ;  e.  g.  tan  va  etan  sampatan  visvamitrah  prathamam 
apasyat  (AB.)  these  same  Sampfdahpniis  Vrsvdmitra  invented  flrsf  (  =  asthe 
lirst  thing). 

p.  Several  ace.  adverbs  are  from  comparatives  and  superlatives  in 
tara  and  tama  formed  from  prepositions  and  adverbs  ;  e.  g.  draghiya 
ayuh  prataram  dddhanah  ohtaining  longer  life  furthermore  (i.  53'^). 
A  good  many  such  have  a  fem.  ace.  form  in  later  use,  but  there  is  only 
one  found  in  the  RV.  :  samtaram  padukfiu  hara  i>«^  your  tioo  little  feet 
closer  together  (viii.  33^^). 

7.  A  special  class  is  formed  by  adverbs  in  vat  expressing  that  an 
action  takes  place  like  that  performed  by  the  noun  preceding  the 
suffix;  e.g.  tvadutaso  manuv^d  vadema  (ii.  10^)  having  thee  as  our 
messenger  ice  umild  speak  like  men  ( =  as  men  should  speak  :  properlj'  some- 
thing that  belongs  to  men). 

S.  Another  class  of  ace.  adverbs  is  formed  from  various  adjectival 
compounds.  A  number  of  these'are  formed  with  the  privative  particle 
a,  being  of  the  nature  of  cognate  accusatives  ;  e.g.  devas  chdndobhir 
imal  lokan  anapajayyftm  abhy  djayan  the  gods  (unconquerably  =) 
irrevocably  conquered  these  worlds  by  means  of  the  metres  (TS.). 

f.  Another  group  comparatively  rare  in  V.,  but  very  common  in 
B.,  are  those  formed  from  prepositionally  governing  adjectival  com- 
pounds; e.g.  anukamdm  tarpayetham  satisfy  yourselves  according  to 
desire  (i.  17*),  adhidevatdm  with  reference  to  the  deity  (SB.).  Probably 
following  the  analogy  of  some  of  these  were  formed  others  in  which 
the  first  member  of  the  compound  is  not  a  preposition,  but  an  adverb 
derived  from  the  relative  ya  ;  e.  g.  yatha-kamdra  ni  padyate  she  turns 
in  according  to  her  desire  (x.  146^),  yavaj-jivdm  (as long  «s  =)for  life  (SB.). 
Some  other  adverbial  compounds  are  used  like  gerunds  in  am ;  e.g. 
stuka-s&rgam  srsta  bhavati  it  is  plaited  like  a  braid  of  hair  (§B.). 

197.  B.  The  ace.  is  largely  used  with  verbal  nouns. 
Besides  being  governed  by  all  participles,  active  and  middle. 


302  OUTLINES   OF   SYNTAX  [197 

and  by  genuine  infinitives,  in  V.  it  is  used  with  agent 
nouns  formed  from  the  root  or  other  verbal  stems  by  means 
of  about  ten  primary  suffixes.  Such  nouns  are  made  from 
the  simple  root  (when  compounded  with  a  preposition),  and 
with  the  suffixes  a  (when  the  stem  is  compounded  with  a 
preposition),  ani  (from  the  aor.  or  desid.  stem),  i  (generally 
from  the  reduplicated  root),  iyas  and  istha  (comparatives 
and  superlatives),  u  (from  desiderative  stems),  uka  (very 
rare  in  V.),  tar  (when  the  root  is  accented),  van  (when  com- 
pounded), snu  (from  causative  stems)  ;  and  a  few  with  the 
secondary  suffix  in.  Examples  of  the  ace.  with  such  agent 
nouns  are  :  devams  tvam  paribhur  asi  thou  encompassest 
the  gods  (v.  IS*"') ;  drlha  eid  arujah  hreaJcing  even  trhat  is 
firm  (iii.  45'-) ;  tvam  no  visva  abhimatih  saksanih  tlioit 
overcomest  all  our  adversaries  (viii.  24^") ;  satam  pdro  ruruk- 
sanih  read))  to  destroy  a  hundred  forts  (ix.  48-) ;  indra  ha 
ratnam  varuna  dh^stha  Indra  and  Varuna  hcsfoiv  treastirc 
most  abundantlij  (iv.  41") ;  vatsams  ca  ghatuko  vrkah  (AV. 
xii,  4')  and  the  nolf  slays  the  calves ;  data  radhamsi  sum- 
hhati giving  riehes  he  shines  {i.  22*^) ;  prataryavano  adhvaram 
coming  early  to  the  sacrifice  (i.  44^^) ;  sthira  cin  namayis- 
navah  0  ye  who  desire  to  hend  even  what  is  rigid  (viii.  20') ; 
kami  hi  virah.  sadam  asya  pitim  fior  the  hero  alivays  desires 
a  draught  of  it  (ii.  14^). 

a.  Some  adjectives  formed  with  aiie  from  prepositions  governing 
the  ace.  are  also  used  with  that  case.  Such  are  pratyanc  facing, 
anv5.nc  following  ;  e.  g.  pratydnn  usdsam  urviya  vi.  bhati  facing  the 
Dawn  (the  fire)  shines  forth  far  and  wide  (v.  28'),  tasmad  aniici  patni 
garhapatyam  aste  hence  the  wife  sits  behind  the  Gdrhapatya  fire  (AB.). 
The  ace.  is  found  even  with  samyanc  "united  ;  e,  g.  osadhir  evd.^enam 
samySucam  dadhati  lie  puts  him  into  contact  nnth  the  i^lants  (MS.)  ;  but 
this  adj.  also  takes  the  inst.,  the  natural  ease  with  a  compound 
of  s^m. 

^.  In  B.  the  only  nouns  taking  the  ace.  seem  to  be  the  des.  adjec- 
tives in  u  and  the  ordinary  adjectives  in  uka  (which  are  very 
common)  and  those  in  in ;  e.  g.  papmanam  apajighamsuh  icishing 
to  drive  away  sin  (AB.),  sarpa  enam  ghatukah  syuh  the  snakes  might  bite 


197-198]  ACCUSATIVE  303 

him  (MS.)  ;  aprativady  enam   bhratrvyo  bhavati  his  enemy  does  not 
contradict  him  (PB.). 

c.  The  ace.  is  governed  by  more  prepositions  than  any 
other  case.  The  genuine  prepositions  with  which  it  is 
exclusively  connected  in  both  V.  and  B.  are  ati  heyond,  anu 
after,  abhi  towards,  prati  against,  tiras  across ;  and  in  V. 
only  acha  towards.  It  is  also  taken  secondarily  by  others 
which  primarily  govern  other  cases  (cp.  176.  1.  2).  The  ace. 
is  further  taken  exclusively  by  the  adnominal  prepositions 
antara  between,  abhitas  around,  upari  above,  sanitur  apart 
from  ;  and  secondarily  by  some  others  (cp.  177.  1-3). 

a.  The  preposition  vma  uithout,  except,  wliich  first  occurs  in  B.  (and 
there  has  only  been  noted  once),  takes  the  ace;  and  rt6  without^ 
which  in  the  EV.  governs  the  abl.  only,  in  B.  begins  to  take  the  ace. 
also  (as  it  often  does  in  jiost-Vedic  Sanskrit). 

p.  In  B.  a  number  of  adverbs  (inst.  of  adjectives  and  substantives 
or  formed  with  tas  from  pronouns  expressive  of  some  relation  in 
space)  take  the  ace.  ;  such  are  dgrena  in  front  of,  dntarena  withist, 
between,  uttarena  north  of,  ddksinena  to  the  right  or  the  sotith  of,  pdrena 
beyond  ;  ubhayfi,-tas  on  both  sides  of. 

y.  In  B.  the  aec.  is  taken  by  two  interjections.  One  of  them,  6d 
lo  !  behold !  (cp.  Lat.  en),  is  always  preceded  by  a  verb  of  motion, 
which,  however,  has  sometimes  to  be  supplied  ;  e.  g.  eyaya  vayur : 
^d  dhatd,m  vrtram  Vdiju  came  (to  see) :  behold,  Vrtra  (was)  dead  (SB.)  ; 
punar  6nia  iti  deva  :  6d  agnim  tirobhutam  ^  loe  are  coming  back',  said 
the  gods;  (they  came  back,  and)  behold!  Agni  (had)  disappeared!  (^B.). 
The  other  interjection  dhiky?e.',  used  with  the  ace.  of  the  person 
only,  is  still  very  rare  in  B.  ;  e.  g.  dhik  tva  jalma^_^astu  fie  on  tjou, 
rogue!  (KB.). 

Double  Accusative. 

198.  A  second  ace.  appears  in  apposition  with  various 
verbs;  e.g.  purusam  ha  vai  deva  agre  pasvim  a  lebhire 
tlie  gods  in  the  beginning  sacrificed  a  man  as  a  victim  (SB.). 
It  is  further  used  : 

1.  predicatively  with  verbs  of  saying  (brti,  vac),  thinking 
(man),  knowing  (vid),  hearing  (sru),  making  (kr),  ordaining 
(vi-dha),    choosing    (vr),    appointing   (ni-dha)   in   both    V. 


304  OUTLINES   OF   SYNTAX  [198 

and  B. ;  e.  g.  svanam  basto  bodhayitaram  abravit  tlw 
he-goat  said  (that)  the  dog  (was)  the  tval'ener  (i.  161^^) ;  yad 
anyo  'nyam  papam  avadan  that  the  one  called  the  other 
tviched  (SB.) ;  agnim  manye  pitai'am  Agni  I  think  a  father 
(x.  7^) ;  marisyantam  c6d  yajamanam  manyeta  ifJie  thinls 
the  sacrificer  (is)  going  to  die  (SB.) ;  ciram  tan  mene  he  thought 
that  too  long  (SB.) ;  vidma  hi  tva  puiuvasum  v;e  knoiv  thee 
(to  be)  possessed  of  much  wealth  (i.  8V] ;  na  vai  hatam  vrtram 
vidma  na  jivam  we  hnoiv  not  (whether)  Vrtra  (is)  dead  nor 
(whether  he  is)  alive  (SB.) ;  revantam  hi  tva  srnomi  I  hear 
(about)  thee  (that  thou  art)  rich  (viii.  2^^) ;  srnvanty  enam. 
agnim  eikyanam  (TS.)  theg  hear  (about)  him  having  piled  the 
fire  (altar) ;  asman  su  jigyiisah  krdhi  make  us  thoroughlg 
victorious  (viii.  SO*^) ;  t^sam  pusanam  adhipam  akarot  he 
made  Pusan  their  lord  (MS.) ;  tasma  ahutir  yajnam  vy 
adadhtih.  they  made  (=  ordained)  the  oblations  (to  be)  the 
sacrifice  for  him  (MS.) ;  agnim  hotaram  pra  vrne  I  choose 
Agni  priest  (iii.  19^);  ni  tvam  agne  manur  dadhe  jyotir 
janaya  sasvate  Mann  has  appointed  thee,  0  Agni,  as  a  light 
for  ever  11  man  (i.  36^ '^). 

2.  to  express  the  person  as  a  direct  object  beside  the 
thing  with  verbs  of  addressing  (vac),  asking  (prach),  begging 
(yac),  approaching  with  prayer  (i,  ya),  milking  (duh),  shaking 
(dhu),  sacrificing  to  (yaj),  doing  to  (kr) ;  e.  g.  agnim  maham 
avoeama  suvrktim  to  Agni  we  have  addressed  a  great  hymn 
(x.  80') ;  prchami  tva  param  antam  prthivyah  /  ask  thee 
ahout  the  farthest  limit  of  the  earth  (i.  IM"^) ;  yajnavalkyam 
dvau  prasnau  praksyami  I  iriil  ask  Yajiiavalkya  iico  questions 
(SB.) ;  apo  yacami  bhesajam  I  beg  healing  from  the  waters 
(x.  9"') ;  tad  agnihotry  agnim  yacet  that  the  Agnihotr  shoidd 
beg  of  Agni  (MS.) ;  vasuni  dasmam  imahe  /re  approach  the 
wondrous  one  for  riches  (i.  42^") ;  tat  tva  yami  I  approach 
thee  for  this  (i.  24^^) ;  duhanty  udhar  divyani  they  milk 
celestial  gifts  from  the  udder  (i.  64'') ;  imam  eva  sarvan 
kaman  duhe  from  her  he  {milks  =)  obtains  all  desires  (SB.) ; 


198]  TWO  ACCUSATIVES  ?>05 

vrksam  phalam  dhuniihi  shalce  down  fruit  from   the   tree 

(iii.  45*) ;  yaja  devam  rtam  brhat  sacrifice  to  the  gods  tJie 

lofty  rite  (i.  75-^) ;  kim  ma  karann  abala  asya  s6nah.  what 

can  his  fechle  hosts  do  to  me  ?  (v.  30''). 

a.  Of  the  above  verbs  vac,  i  and  ya,  dhu,  yaj  and  kr  do  not  seem 
to  be  found  with  two  ace.  in  B. ;  on  the  other  hand  a-gam  approach, 
dha  viilk,  ji  loin,  jya  sorest  from  are  so  used  there ;  e.  g.  agnir  vai 
varunam  brahmacSryam  a  gachat  Agni  (approached  =  )  aaked  Vaninafor 
ihe  2}osition  of  a  religious  student  (MS.)  ;  imal  lokan  adhayad  yam-yam 
kamam  akamayata /rom  these  worlds  he  extracted  whatever  he  desired  (AB.) ; 
devan  d.sura  yajnam  ajayan  the  Asnras  won  ihe  sacrifice  from  the  gods 
(MS.)  ;  indro  marutah  sahasram  ajinat  Indra  wrested  a  thousand  from 
the  Marnts  (PB.>. 

3.  to  express  the  agent'  with  causative  verbs  beside  the 
ace.  which  would  be  taken  by  the  simple  verb  also  ;  e.  g. 
nsan  devam  usatah  payaya  havih  eager  thyself  cause  the 
eager  gods  to  drinlc  the  libation  (ii.  37^) ;  ta  yajaraanam 
vacayati  he  mal-es  the  sacrificer  name  them  (TS.).  Witli 
verbs  of  motion  the  other  ace.  expresses  the  goal  (which  is, 
however,  never  a  person) - ;  e.g.  param  eva  paravatam 
sapatnim  gamayamasi  to  the  extreme  distance  we  cause  the 
rival  wife  to  go  (x.  145*) ;  yajamanam  suvargam  lokam 
gamayati  he  causes  the  sacrificer  to  reach  the  celestial 
tvorld  (TS.). 

a.  In  B.  the  agent  is  frequently  put  in  the  inst.  instead  of  the  ace. 
witla  various  causatives,  especially  that  of  grah  seize  ;  e.  g.  ta  varu- 
nena^agrahayat  (MS.)  he  caused  Varima  to  seise  them  ( =  he  caused  them 
to  be  seized  by  Varuna). 

b.  In  B.  a  second  ace.  expresses  the  goal  (with  ni  lead)  or  duration 
of  time  beside  tlie  ace.  of  the  object  ;  e.g.  evdm  eva^enam  kxirm&h 
suvargdrn  lokam  nayati  thus  the  tortoise  leads  him  to  the  celestial  icorld 
(TS.),  tisro  ratrir  vratdrn  caret  he  should  observe  a  fast  for  three  nights 
fTS\ 


1  Which  would  be  expressed  by  the  nom.  with  the  simple  verb  ; 
e.  g.  deva  havih  pibanti  tite  gods  drink  the  libation. 

-  When  the  goal  is  a  person  it  is  expressed  by  the  loc.  or  a  loc. 
adverb  ;  e.  g.  agnav  agnirn  gamayet  he  would  send  Agni  to  Agni  (SB.)  ; 
devatrfi^evd,  enad  gamayati  he  sends  it  to  the  gods  (SB.^. 

1819  X 


306  OUTLINES   OF   SYNTAX  [i99 

Instrumental. 

199.  A.  The  fundamental  sense  of  this  case  is  con- 
comitance, which  may  variously  l)e  rendered  by  with,  1)7/, 
through,  according  as  it  expresses  accompaniment,  instru- 
mentality or  agency,  causality,  motion  through  space  or 
duration  of  time. 

1.  In  its  sociative  sense  the  instrumental  expresses  the 

companion  or  accompaniment  of  the  svibjeet  in  any  activity  ; 

e.  g.  dev6  dev^bhir  a  gamat  may  the  god  come  with  the  gods 

(i.  l"*) ;  indrena  yuja  nir  apam  aubjo  arnavam  with  Indra 

as  thy  companion  thou  dlrlsf  release  the  flood  of  waters  (ii.  23^^^) ; 

indro  no  radhasa^a  gamat  may  Indra  come  to  us  with  ivealth 

(iv.  55^% 

a.  Similnrly  in  B.  :  agnir  vasubhir  ud  akramat  Indra  departed  with 
the  Vasus  (AB.)  ;  y6na  mdntrena  juhoti  td,d  y^juh  the  spell  to  the  accom- 
paniment of  which  he  offers  the  oblation  is  the  Yajus  (SB.);  t^d  asya 
sfi,hasa^aditsanta  they  tried  to  take  it  from  him  hy  force  (TS.). 

2.  In  its  instrumental  sense  it  exj)resses  the  means 
(person  or  thing)  by  which  an  action  is  accomplished  ;  e.  g. 
vayam  indrena  sanuyama  vajam  toe  woidd  win  booty  through 
Indra  (i.  101^^) ;  ahan  vrtram  indro  vajrena  Indra  smote 
Vrtra  with  his  holt  (i.  32-^). 

a.  Similarly  in  B. :  k^na  virena  by  whom  as  champion  (SB.);  Iirsna 
bijam  haranti  they  carry  corn  {imfh  =)  on  tlte  head  (SB.);  tasmad 
diksinena  h^stena^_^4nnam  adyate  therefore  food  is  eaten  7cith  the  right 
hand  (MS.). 

3.  In  its  causal  sense  it  expresses  the  reason  or  motive 
of  an  action  =  hy  reason  of,  on  account  of,  for  the  sahe  of; 
e.  g.  samasya  pitya  ...  a  gatam  come  hither  for  the  sal-e  of 
the  Soma  draught  (i.  46^^) ;  asatriir  janusa  sanad  asi  thou 
art  hy  thy  nature  tvithout  foes  from  of  old  (i.  102^^). 

«.  Similarly  in  B.  :  sa  bhisa  ni  lilye  he  concecded  himself  through  fear 
(SB.).;  so  iiarana  hy  name. 

4.  In  its  local  sense  of  through  or  over  it  is  used  with 


199]  INSTRUMENTAL  807 

verbs  of  motion  to  express  the  space  through  or  over  which 

an  action  extends  ;  e.  g.  diva  yanti  maruto  bhumya^agnir 

ayam  vato  antariksena  yati  the  Mariifs  go  along  the  s7ci/, 

Agni  over  the  earth,  the  Wind  here  goes  tlirough  the  air  (i.  161^*) ; 

antarikse  patlaibhih  patantam  flying  along  the  paths  in  the 

air  (x.  87^'). 

a.  Ill  B.  the  inst.  is  constantly  used  in  the  local  sense  with  words 
meaning  jndh  or  door,  but  rarely  with  others  ;  e.  g.  yd.tha^_^dksetrajuo 
'ny^na  patha  nayet  as  if  one  who  does  not  hnoio  the  district  were  to  lead  ly  a 
urong  road  {HB.) ;  sdrasvatya  yanti  they  go  along  the  Stirasvatt  (TS.). 

5.  In  its  temporal  sense  the  inst.  expresses  the  time 
throughout  which  an  action  extends  ;  e.  g.  purvibhir  dadas- 
ima  saradbhih  we  have  worshipped  throughout  many  autumns 
(i.  86'').  Sometimes,  however,  the  sense  of  duration  is  not 
apparent,  the  inst.  being  then  used  like  the  loc.  of  time  ; 
thus  rtuna  and  rtubhih  meati  in  due  season. 

a.  In  B.  the  temporal  meaning  is  rare  ;  e.g.  sava  isumatrSm  evahna 
tirydiin  avardhata  he  grew  in  the  course  of  a  day  qtiite  an  arrow's  length  in 

ipidth  (MS.). 

6.  Many  instrumentals  (chiefly  of  the  sociative  and  local 
classes)  have  come  to  be  used  in  a  purely  adverbial  sense. 
Such  are  formed  from  either  substantives  or  adjectives  (of 
which  sometimes  no  other  form  occurs) ;  e.  g.  anjasa  straight- 
way,  mahobhih  mightily,  sahasa  and  sahobhis  suddenly ; 
antarena  u-ifhin,  uttarena  to  the  north  ;  uccais  above,  nieais 
below,  paracais  sideways,  -prsLcais  forwards,  sanais  and  sanais, 
sanakais  sloivly. 

a.  In  a  number  of  these  instrnmentals  the  adverbial  use  is  indicated, 
not  only  by  the  sense,  but  by  a  shift  of  accent ;  e.  g.  diva  by  day  ;  dak- 
sina  to  the  right;  madhya  between;  naktaya  6;/  night;  svapnaya  in  a 
dream;  aksnaya  aoos.s  (B.) ;  anomalously  formed  from  ii  stems  :  asuya 
quickly,  dhrsnuya  ItoUUg,  raghuya  swiftly,  sadhuya  straightway,  mithuya 
falsely  (mithya  SB.),  anusthuya  immediately  (anusthya  B.);  and  from  a 
pronoun,  amuya  in  that  way. 

199.    B.  Besides  having  the  above  general  and  indepen- 
dent uses  the  inst.  also  appears,  in  special  connexion  with 

x2 


308  OUTLINES   OF   SYNTAX  [199 

different  classes  of  words  by  which  it  may  be  said  to  be 
' governed ' : 

1,  with  verbs  expressing : 

a.  association  or  contention  with  ;  in  RV.  :  yat  marshal, 
yad  combine,  yuj  join  (mid.),  sac  accompany,  yudh  fffhf, 
sprdh  strive,  has  race,  krid  p^ay ;  in  B. :  yudh  fjghf,  vi-ji 
contend  victoriously  (tvith). 

b.  separation  from  (compounds  with  vi) ;  in  RV. :  vi-yu 
dissever  from,  vi-vrt  turn  away  from,  vy-a-vrt  separate  (intr.) 
from ;  in  B. :  vy-a-vrt  id.,  vi-rdh  be  deprived  of,  vi-stha  be 
removed  from,  visvann  i  go  (may  from  =  lose. 

c.  enjoyment;  in  RV. :  kan  find  pleasure  in,  mad  be 
exhilarated  with,  uc  be  fond  of,  tus  be  satisfied  with,  mah 
delight  in,  hrs  rejoice  in,  bhuj  enjoy  ;  in  B. :  trp  be  pleased 
with,  nand  be  glad  of,  bhuj  enjoy. 

d.  repletion  ;  in  RV.  :  pr  fill  (ace.)  with,^  pi  Sircll  with  ; 
in  B.  :  caus.  of  pr  :  piiraya  fill,  pass,  purya  be  filled  with. 

e.  purchase  for  (a  price) ;  in  V.  :  vi-kri  bargain  away  for  ; 
in  B. :  nis-kri  ransom  for. 

f.  adoration  or  sacrifice  (the  victim  or  object  offered).  Witli 
yaj  sacrifice  to  the  deity  is  in  the  ace,  in  both  V.  and  B.  ; 
in  B.  the  sacrificial  date  also  is  put  in  the  (cognate)  ace.  ; 
e.  g.  amavasyam  yajate  he  celebrates  the  feast  of  new  moon. 

g.  procedure :  the  verb  car  in  both  V.  and  B.  ;  e.  g. 
adhenva  carati  mayaya  he  acts  with  barren  craft  (x.  71'^) ; 
upamsu  vaca  carati  he  proceeds  in  a  low  tone  with  his  voice 

(AB.). 

h.  ability  to  do :  the  verb  kr  in  both  V.  and  B.  ;  e.  g.  kim 
rca  karisyati  what  will  he  do  with  a  hymn  ?  (i.  IGi"'^) ;  kim 
sa  tair  grhaih  kuryat  irhat  could  he  do  with  that  house? 
(SB.).  In  B.  the  phrase  artho  bhavati  there  is  business  with 
=  there  is  need  o/(Lat.  opus  est  aliqua  re)  is  similarly  used  : 


5  Sometimes  also  with  tlie  gen.:  tlie  past  part.  i)ass.  purnd,  witli  the 
gen.  -  fidl  of,  hut  with  the  inst.  filUd  "'''>>■ 


199]  INSTKUMENTAL  309 

e.  g.  yarhi  vava  vo  mayartho  bhavita  if  yon  (gen.)  shall 
have  need  of  me  (AB.). 

/.  dominion:  only  (in  V.)  the  verb  patya  be  lord  o/(lit. 
h}i  means  of) ;  e.  g.  indro  visvair  viryaih  patyamanah 
India  who  is  lord  of  all  heroic  powers  (iii.  o^^'). 

j.  subsistence  :  only  (in  B.)  the  verb  jiv  live  on,  subsist  by  ; 
^-  g-  yaya  manusya  jivanti  (the  cow)  on  which  men  subsist 
(TS.). 

a.  With  passive  forms  of  the  verb  (including  participles)  the  inst. 
expresses  either  the  means  (as  with  the  active  verb)  or  the  agent  (the 
nom.  of  the  active  verb) ;  e.  g.  ghrtena^agnih  sam  ajyate  Agiii  is 
a)iointed  with  ghee  (x.  118*) ;  usa  uchanti  ribhyate  vasisthaih  Usas  when 
she  dawns  is  praised  hy  the  Vasisthas  (vii.  76'').  Similarly  in  B.  :  prajapa- 
tina  srjyante  they  are  created  hy  Prajapati  (MS.)  ;  patrair  annam  adyate 
food  is  eaten  with  the  aid  of  dishes  (MS.). 

(8.  Nominal  forms  connected  with  the  verb,  when  they  have  a  passive 
sense,  as  gerundives  and  infinitives,  take  the  same  construction  ;  e.  g. 
nfbhir  havyah.  to  be  invoked  by  men  (vii.  22'') ;  ripuna  na^avacdkse  not  to 
be  observed  hy  the  enemy  (iv.  58^) . 

2.  with  nouns : 

a.  substantives  and  adjectives  (especially  those  com- 
pounded with  sa-)  expressive  of  association  or  equality  ;  e.  g. 
nasunvata  sakhyam  vasti  surah  the  hero  desires  not  friend- 
ship with  him  who  does  not  press  Soma  (x.  42^) ;  asi  samo 
devaih  thou  art  equal  to  the  gods  (vi.  48^") ;  indro  vai  sadrn 
devatabhir  asit  Indra  teas  equal  to  the  (other)  deities  (TS.) ; 
ajyena  misrah  mixed  with  butter  (SB.). 

b.  other  adjectives,  to  express  that  by  which  the  quality 
in  question  is  produced  ;  e.  g.  uso  vajena  vajini  0  Daivn 
rich  in  booty  (iii.  61^) ;  bahuh  prajaya  bhavisyasi  thou  wilt 

be  rich  in  offspring  (SB.). 

c.  numerals  accompanied  by  na,  to  express  deficiency ; 
e.  g.  ekaya  na  vimsatih  not  twenty  by  (lack  of)  one  = 
nineteen. 

o.  with  prepositions  :  genuine  prepositions  are  virtually 
not  used  with  the  instrumental.     The  only  exceptions  in 


310  OUTLINES   OF  SYNTAX  [199-200 

the  EV.  are  the  employment  of  adhi  with  the  inst.  of  snu 
height ;  of  lipa  in  three  passages  with  dyubhis  and  dharma- 
bhis  ;  and  possibly  of  sam  icith  in  a  few  passages  with  the 
inst.  But  prepositional  adverbs  are  found  thus  used  ;  in 
the  KV.  only  avas  heloic  and  paras  above ;  and  in  both  V. 
and  B.  saha  and  sakam  with.     Cp.  177,  2. 

Dative. 

200.  The  dative  expresses  the  notion  with  which  an 
action  is  concerned.  It  is  either  connected  with  individual 
words  or  is  used  more  generally  as  a  complement  to  the 
whole  statement. 

A.  Dative  in  a  special  sense  with : 

1.  verbs  (mostly  as  affecting  persons)  having  the  sense  of 
a.  give ;  in  V.  B.  da  give,  yam  extend,  dha  bestow,  bhaj 
aj}portion  ;  e,  g.  dadhati  ratuam  vidhate  he  bestows  treasure 
on  the  ivorshipper  (iv.  12^*) ;  in  V.  also  many  other  verbs 
expressing  a  modification  of  the  sense  of  giving :  dis  assign, 
ava-duh  tnilk  down  on,  pr  bestow  fulljj,  pre  bestow  abwndantlg, 
mamh  give  liberally,  ma  measure  out,  ra  procure  [for],  ni-yu 
bestow  permanently,  vid  find  {for),  san  obtain  {for),  su  set  in 
motion  {for),  srj  shed  {for),  and  others. 

b.  sacrifice  ;  in  V.  a-yaj  ofi^er  to  (while  yaj  takes  the  ace.) ; 
and  in  V.  B.  kr  when  =  make  an  ofi'ering  to ;  in  B.  a-labh 
{catch  and  tie  up  — )  offer ;  e.  g.  agnibhyah  pasian  a  labhate 
he  sacrifices  the  animals  to  the  Agnis  (TS.). 

c.  say  =  announce,  explain  (but  with  ace.  of  person  if  = 
address) ;  in  V.  B.  ah,  bru,  vac,  vad  (in  B.  also  a-caks) ;  in 
V.  also  arc  and  ga  sing  to,  stu  utter  praise  to,  gir,  rap, 
kaxas  praise  anything  (ace.)  to.  In  B.  also  :  ni-hnu  apologise 
to  ;  e.g.  tad  u  devebhyo  ni  hnute  thereby  he  craves  pardon  of 
the  gods  (SB.). 

d.  hear :  in  KV.  a  few  times  sru  =  listen  to ;  also  ram 
linger  for  =  listen  to. 


•200]  DATIVE  311 

('.  believe,  liave  confidence  in :  srad  dha  ;  e.  g.  srad  asmai 
dhatta  Relieve  in  him  (ii.  12') ;  in  B.  also  slagh  trust  in. 

f.  help,  he  gracious  to,  pau  homage  to :  in  V.  sak  aid,  sidh 
avail;  sam-nam  be  complaisant  to;  d&saay a  pa g  honour  to, 
sapai'ya  do  a)igthing  (ace.)  in  honour  of  (a  god) ;  das,  vidh, 
sac  p)ag  homage  to  (a  god),  sam  serve  (a  god) ;  in  V.  and  B.  : 
mrd  be  gracious  to. 

g.  bring :  ni,  bhr,  vah,  hi,  hr ;  e.  g.  ama  sat6  vahasi 
bhuri  vamam  for  him  ivho  is  at  home  thou  bringest  much 
wealtlt  (i.  12-4^-) ;  devebhyo  havyam  vahanti  thcij  take  the 
oblation  to  the  gods  (TS.) ;  tarn  harami  pitryajnaya  devam 
that  god  I  bring  to  the  sacrifice  for  the  Manes  (x.  16^") ;  visah 
ksatriyaya  balim  haranti  the  peasants  bring  the  taxes  to  the 
nobility  (SB.).  In  V.  only  there  are  many  other  verbs,  with 
this  general  sense,  that  take  the  dative,  such  as  r,  inv,  cud 
set  in  motion  for,  and  figurative  expressions  such  as  abhi-ksar 
stream  to,  61  and  sue  shine  on,  prus  spninlde  on,  abhi-va 
icaft  to:  in  V.  also  the  verb  i  go  is  used  with  the  dat.  ;  e.  g. 
pra  visnave  susam  etu  manma  let  my  stro)ig  hymn  go  forth 
in  honour  of  Vimu  (i.  154:^). 

h.  please :  svad  be  stoeet  to  and  chand  be  pleasing  to  ;  e.  g. 
svadasva^indraya  pitaye  be  sweet  to  Indra  as  a  draught 
(ix.  74^) ;  ut6  tad  asmai  madhv  ic  cachadyat  and  may  that 
mead  be  pleasing  to  him  (x.  73'^). 

i.  succeed :  in  B.  rdh  and  kip  ;  e.  g.  na  ha^eva^asmai  tat 
sam  anrdhe  he  did  not  succeed  in  that  (SB.) ;  kalpate  'smai 
he  succeeds  (TS.). 

j.  subject  to :  radh  ;  e.  g.  asmabhyam  vrtra  randhi  subject 
our  foes  to  us  (iv.  22'-). 

h  yield  to :  radh  succumb,  nam  and  ni-ha  bow  before, 
stha  obey,  m.rad  and  ksam  (B.)  yield  to,  a-waso  fall  a  victim 
to ;  e.  g.  mo  aham  dvisate  radham  may  I  not  succumb  to 
my  enemy  (i.  50^") ;  tasthuh  savaya  te  they  obey  thy  command 
(iv.  54^). 

I.  be  angry  with :  in  V.  hr  (hrnite) ;  in  V.  and  B. :  asuya 


312  OUTLINES   OF    SYNTAX  [200 

and   krudh ;    in    B.    also    aratiya    he   hostile   and    gla    he 
averse  to. 

m.  seeJc  to  injure :  in  V.  and  B.  druh  ;  e,  g.  yad  dudrohitha 
striyai  punis6  what  mischief  thou  hast  done  to  woman  or  man 

(AV.). 

n.  cast  at :  V.  srj  discharge  ;  V.  B.  as  throw ;  B.  pra-hr 
hurl  at ;  e.  g.  srjad  asta  didyum  asmai  the  archer  shot  a 
lightning  shaft  at  him  (i.  71'^) ;  tasmai  tarn  isum  asyati  he 
shoots  the  arrow  at  Mm  (MS.) ;  vajram  bhratrvyaya  pra 
harati  he  hurls  the  holt  at  the  foe  (TS.). 

0.  exist  or  he  intended  for,  accrue  to :  as  he,  bhu  hecome ; 
e.g.  gambMr6  cid  bhavati  gadham  asmai  even  in  deep 
water  there  is  a  ford  for  him  (vi.  24^) ;  indra  tiibhyam  id 
abhuma  tvc  have  hecome  thine  oivn,  0  Indra  (TS.) ;  atha  ko 
mahyatn  bhago  bhavisyati  then  ivhat  share  will  accrue  to 
me  (SB.). 

a.  The  dative  is  used  with  gerundives  and  infinitives  to  express  tlie 
agent,  and  with  the  latter  also  the  object  by  attraction  instead  of  the 
ace. ;  e.  g.  ydh  stotrbhyo  havyo  asti  who  is  to  he  utvoked  by  singers  (i.  33^) ; 
vi  srayantam  prayai  dev^bhyah  let  (the  doors)  p/^en  xoidefor  the  gods  to 
enter  (i.  142®);  indram  arkair  Avardhayann  ahaye  hantava  u  ihey 
sliengthemd  Indra  with  hymns  to  slay  the  serpent  (v.  31*). 

2.  The  dative  is  used  with  a  certain  number  of  sub- 
stantives. 

a.  Such  are  words  that  invoke  blessings,  especially  namas 
homage  (with  the  verbs  kr  do  or  as  he,  which  are  often  to  be 
supplied) ;  e.  g.  namo  mahadbhyah  homage  to  the  great 
(i.  27^^) ;  namo  'stu  brahmisthaya  adoration  to  the  greatest 
Brahman  (SB.).  Similarly  used  are  the  sacrificial  formulas 
svaha,  svadha,  vasat  hail !  hlessing !  e.  g.  tebhyah  svaha 
hlessing  on  them  (AV.). 

a.  The  indeelinables  sam  in  V.  and  kani  in  B.  meaning  welfare  are 
used  as  uom.  or  ace.  with  the  dat. ;  e.  g.  yditha  sam  asad  dvipade 
catuspade  in  order  tluit  there  'inay  he  ivel/are  for  hipcd  and  quadruped 
{i.  114') ;  ahutayo  hy  agnaye  k^m/or  llie  oblations  are  a  joy  to  Agni  (SB.) ; 
na^asma  d-kam  bhavati  it  does  notfare  ill  ivith  him  (TS.). 


200]  ^  DATIVE  318 

13.  In  V.  the  substantives  kama  desire  and  gatii path  may  i)eiliaps  be 
regarded  as  taking  a  dative  without  a  verb  to  be  supplied  ;  e.g.  krnva- 
naso  amrtatvaya  gatum  procuring  for  tliemselves  a  path  to  immortaUtii 
^i.72»). 

7.  In  the  name  D&syave  vrkah  WolfiotheDasyu  (RV.)  the  dat.  is  to  be 
exphvined  as  due  to  its  use  in  the  sentence  he  in  a  very  icolf  to  the  Dasyu. 

3.  The  dative  is  used  with  adjectives  meaning  dear,  kind, 
agreeable,  beneficial,  ivilllng,  obedient,  ill-disposed,  hostile ;  e.  g. 
siva  sakhibhya  uta  mahyam  asit  she  was  kind  to  friends 
and  also  to  me  (x.  34'^) ;  atithis  carur  ayave  a  guest  dear  to 
man  (ii.  2^) ;  yad  vava  jiv6bhyo  hitam  tat  pitrbhyah  ivhat 
is  good  for  the  living  is  good  for  the  Manes  (SB.) ;  sa  ratamana 
vrascanaya  bhavati  (SB.)  he  is  ready  for  felling  (the  tree) ; 
pratyudyaminim  ha  ksatraya  visam  kuryat  he  would 
make  tlie peasantry  hostile  to  the  nobility  (SB.). 

u.  The  adj.  dnagas  sinless  often  seems  to  take  the  dative  of  the  name 
of  a  deity,  but  it  is  somewhat  uncertain  whether  tlie  case  should  not 
be  connected  with  the  verb  ;  e.g.  dnagaso  aditaye  syama  may  ice  bo 
sinless  (to  =)in  the  eyes  of  Adit  i,  {i.  24^^)  may  perhaps  mean  may  ivv,  as 
sinless,  belong  to  Aditi. 

4.  The  dative  is  used  with  a  few  adverbs. 

a.  aram  often  takes  the  dat.  ;  e.  g.  ye  aram  vahanti 
manyave  icho  drive  in  accordance  with  (thy)  zeal  (vi.  16*^). 
This  use  of  aram  is  common  in  combination  with  the  verbs 
kr,  gam,  and  bhu.  When  used  with  the  dat.  aram  is  not 
infrequently  equivalent  to  an  adj. ;  e.  g.  sasma  aram  he  is 
ready  for  him  (ii.  18^) ;  ayam  somo  astu  aram  manase 
yuvabhyam  let  this  Soma  he  agreeable  to  your  heart  (i.  108-). 
In  B.  alam  appears  in  the  place  of  aram  and  is  often 
simihxrly  used  ;  e.  g.  nalam  ahutya  asa,  nalam  bhaksaya 
he  teas  not  suitable  for  sacrifice,  nor  suitable  for  food  (SB.). 

b.  The  adverb  avis  visibly  is  used  with  the  dat.  in  V.  and 
B.,  but  only  when  accompanied  by  the  verbs  kr,  bhu  or  as 
(the  latter  sometimes  to  be  supplied) ;  e.  g.  avir  ebhyo 
abhavat  suryah  the  sun  appeared  to  them  (i.  liQ'^) ;  tasmai  va 
avir  asama  we  tcill  appear  to  him  (SB.). 


314  OUTLINES   OF   SYNTAX  [200 

B.  The  dative  also  in  a  general  sense  complements  the 
statement  of  the  whole  sentence. 

1.  It  expresses  the  person  for  whose  advantage  or 
disadvantage  the  action  of  the  sentence  takes  place ;  e.  g. 
devan  devayate  yaja  ivorshi})  the  gods  for  the  hcnejit  of  the 
2)lous  man  (i.  15'-);  tasma  etam  vajram  akurvan  for  him 
the//  made  this  holt  (SB.) ;  tasma  upakrtaya  niyoktaram  na 
vividuh  (AB.)  for  him  tvhen  he  had  heen  brought  near  they  could 
Jind  no  hinder  (i.e.  they  could  find  no  one  willing  to  bind  him). 

2.  It  expresses  the  purpose  for  which  an  action  is  done 
(final  dative) ;  e.  g.  urdhvas  tistha  na  titaye  stand  up  for 
our  help  =  in  order  to  help  us  (i.  30*^) ;  na  susvim  indro  avase 
mrdhati  Indra  ivill  not  leave  the  pious  man  in  the  lurch  for 
help  (vi.  23^) ;  svargaya  lokaya  visnukramah.  kramyante 
the  Visnu  ste2)S  are  taJien  for  the  salx  of  (=  in  order  to  gain) 
heaven  (TS,);  agnim  hotraya  pravrnata  theg  chose  Agnifor 
the  priesthood  =  in  order  that  he  should  be  priest  (SB.).  The 
final  sense  is  commonly  expressed  by  abstract  substantives 
(including  in  V.  many  infinitives)  ;  e.  g.  adhi  sriye  duhita 
suryasya  ratham  tasthau  the  daughter  of  the  sun  has  mounted 
the  car  for  beautg  =  so  as  to  produce  a  beautiful  effect  (vi.  63') ; 
tena^eva^enam  sam  srjati  santyai  with  him  (Mitra)  he  unites 
him  (Agni)/o/'  appeasement  (TS.). 

a.  This  final  dat.  is  particularly  used  with  as  and  bhu  ; 
e.g.  asti  hi  sma  madaya  vah  there  is  {something)  for  gour 
intoxication,  i.  e.  to  intoxicate  you  (i.  37^'') ;  madaya  somah 
(sc.  astiySoma  {is  for  =  )  produces  intoxication  (SB.). 

3.  The  dative  is  used,  though  rarely,  in  expressions 
of  time  like  the  English  for ;  e.  g.  nunam  na  indra^ 
aparaya  ca  syah  now  and  for  the  future  magst  thou  he  ours, 
0  Indra  (vi.  33^) ;  samvatsaraya  sam  amyate^br  a  year  an 
alliance  is  made  (MS.). 

a.  The  iterative  compound  dive-dive  day  by  daij,  though  apparently 
dat.  of  div,  is  probably  in  reality  meant  for  the  loc.  uf  the  transfer 
stem  div&. 


200-201]  DATIVE  ai5 

4.  Two  datives  connected  in  sense  often  appear  together. 
This  occurs  in  V.  when  an  ace.  is  attracted  by  a  dative 
infinitive  ;  e.  g.  vrtraya  hantave  =  vrtram  hantave  to  slay 
Vrtra  (cp.  200.  A.  1  o  a). 

a.  There  is  an  analogous  u«e  in  B.,  where,  liowever,  an  abstract 
biibstiintivc  takes  the  phice  of  the  intiuitive;  e.g.  yatha^idam  pani- 
bhyam  avan6janaya,^ahdranty  ev&m  just  as  iheij  bring  it  for  ivasldnij  tke 
hands  i^SB.).  Two  datives  are  here  often  found  with  the  verb  stha,  one 
expressing  the  purpose,  the  other  tlie  person  affected  by  the  action  ; 
e.g.  devebhyah  pasavo  'nnadyayalambaya  na^_^atisthanta  the  animals 
did  not  present  themselves  to  the  gods  for  food,  for  sacrifice  (AB.). 

5.  The  adverbial  use  of  the  dative  is  very  rare :  kamaya 
and  arthaya  for  the  sale  of  may  bo  regarded  as  such ; 
kamaearasya  kamaya  for  the  salce  of  unrestrained  motion 
(SB.) ;  asmakarthaya  jajnise  thou  hast  been  horn  for  our 
sahe  (A v.). 


Ablative. 

201.  The  abhxtive,  expressing  the  starting-point  from 
which  the  action  of  the  verb  proceeds,  may  as  a  rule  be 
translated  by  from.  It  is  chiefly  connected  with  various 
classes  of  words,  but  is  also  used  independently. 

A.  In  its  dependent  use  the  ablative  appears  with : 
1.  verbs  a.  expressing  a  local  action,  as  go,  proceed,  drive, 
lead,  take,  receive ;  pour,  drlnlc ;  call,  loosen,  ward  off,  exclude ; 
e.  g.  iyiir  gavo  na  yavasad  agopah  they  tvent  like  unhcrded 
Icine  from  the  pasture  (vii.  18^") ;  vrtrasya  svasathad  isa- 
manah  fleeing  from  the  snorting  of  Vrtra  (viii.  96") ;  asatah 
sad  ajayata/roju  non-heing  arose  heing  (x.  72^);  abhrad  iva 
pra  stanayanti  vrstayah  from  the  cloud  as  it  were  thunder  the 
rains  (x.  75-') ;  tvam  dasyumr  okasa  ajah  thou  drovest  the 
enemies  from  the  house  (vii.  5^) ;  bhujyiim  samudrad  uha- 
thuh  ye  tico  have  home  Blmjyu  from  the  sea  (vi.  62*^) ;  daso 
hiranyapindan  divodasad  asanisam   ten  lumps  of  gold  I 


316  OUTLINES   OF   SYNTAX  [201 

have  received  from  Divodasa  (vi.  47^^) ;  apad  dhotrad  uta 
potrad  amatta  he  has  drunk  from  the  Hotr's  vessel  and  has 
intoxicated  himself  from  the  Potr's  vessel  (ii.  37"*) ;  maruto  yad 
vo  divah  havamahe  0  Maruts,  when  ive  call  //on  from  heaven 
(viii.  7^^) ;  siinas  cic  ch^pam  yupad  amuncah  thou  didst 
release  Sunahsepa  from  the  post  (v.  2") ;  yuyutam  asmad 
aniram  amivam  ward  off  from  us  sickness  and  calamit/j 
(vii.  71-^). 

n.  Examples  from  B.  are  :  y&d  dhaved  annadyad  dhavet  if  lie  were  to 
run,  he  inould  run  away  from  his  food  (TS.);  sa  rdthat  papata  hefellfroin 
lits  car  (SB.);  divo  vrstir  irte  rain  comes  from  the  sky  (TS.);  rsayah  kavasam 
ailusam  som.ad  anayan  the  seers  led  Kavasa  Ailusa  away  from  Soma,  i.e. 
excluded  him  from  it  (AB.)  ;  enan  asmal  lokad  anudanta  they  droce  them 
au'ayfrom  this  world  (AB,) ;  tasmad  auasa  eva  grhniyat  therefore  he  shotdd 
take  it  from  the  cart  (SB.);  kesavat  piirusat  sisena  parisriitam  krinati 
he  buys  the  Parisrui  from  a  long-haired  ynanfor  lead  (SB.  i ;  sa  evd^eiiam 
varunapasan  muncati  he  releases  him  from  the  fetter  of  Varuna  (TS.) ; 
suvargal  lokad  yajamano  hiyeta  the  sacrificer  loouldfall  short  of  heaven 
l^TS.).  The  two  verbs  antar  dha  liide  and  ni-li  conceal'  oneself -Ave  used 
with  the  abl.  in  B.  only :  vajrena^^enam  suvargal  lokad  antar  dadhyat 
he  would  exclude  him  from  heacen  ivifh  the  bolt  (TS.)  ;  agnir  devebhyo  ni- 
layata  Ayni  concealed  himself  from  the  gods  i^TS.). 

b.  expressing  rescue,  protect ;  fear,  dislike  ;  transcend,  prefer  : 
verbs  with  the  latter  two  senses  as  well  as  urusya  protect, 
raks  guard,  and  rej  tremble  take  this  construction  in  V.  only  ; 
pa  and  tra  protect  and  bhi  fear  in  both  V.  and  B.  ;  gopaya 
protect,  bibhatsa  be  disgusted  ivith  in  B.  only  :  e.  g.  amhaso 
no  mitra  urusyet  ma?/  Mitra  rescue  us  from  distress  (iv.  55^) ; 
sa  nas  trasate  duritat  he  shall  protect  us  from  misfortune 
(i.  128^) ;  indrasya  vajrad  abibhet  slic  ivas  afraid  oflndra's 
bolt  (x.  138^) ;  pra  sindhubhyo  ririce,  pra  ksitibhyah  he 
reaches  bei/ond  rivers  and  begond  lands  (x.  89^^) ;  somat  sutad 
indro  avrnita  vasisthan  Indra  preferred  the  Vasidhas  to 
(Pasadyumna's)  pressed  Soma  (vii.  33^). 

a.  With  bhi  two  ablatives  are  found,  the  one  being  the 
object  feared,  the  other  the  action  proceeding  from  it ;  e.  g. 
indrasya  vajrad  abibhed  abhisnathah  she  was  afraid  of 


£01]  ABLATIVE  817 

Imlra's  holt,  of  its  crushing  (x.  138"'),  i.  e.  that  it  would  crush 
her ;  asuraraksas6bhya  asangad  bibhayam  cakruh  fhci/ 
were  afraid  of  the  Asuras  and  Eakmsas,  of  their  attachment  = 
that  they  would  attach  themselves  to  them  (SB.). 

2.  substantives  when  derived  from,  or  equivalent  to, 
verbs  used  with  the  ablative  ;  e.  g.  sarma  no  yamsan  triva- 
rutham  amhasah  they  shall  grant  lis  thrice-protecting  shelter 
from  distress  (x.  66"');  lipa  chayam  iva  ghrner  aganma 
sarma  te  vayam  we  have  entered  tliy  shelter  liJiC  shade  (that 
protects)  from  heat  (vi.  16=^^^) ;  raksobhyo  vai  tarn  bhisa 
vacam  ayachan  they  restrained  their  speech  from  fear  of  the 

f 

demons  (SB.). 

8.  adjectives :  in  V.  and  B.  comparatives  and  adjectives 
of  cognate  sense,  when  it  means  than  ;  e.  g.  ghrtat  svadiyan 
sweeter  than  butter  (viii.  24^") ;  visvasmad  indra  uttarah 
Indra  is  greater  than  every  one{x.  86^) ;  jatany  avarany  asmat 
horn  later  than  he  (viii.  96*') ;  purva  visvasmad  bhiivanad 
abodhi  she  has  aioakened  earlier  than  every  being  (i.  128^) ; 
papiyan  asvad  gardabhah  the  ass  is  worse  than  the  horse 
(TS.) ;  brahma  hi  purvam  ksatrat  the  priesthood  is  superior 
to  the  warrior  class  (PB.) ;  anyo  va  ayam  asmad  bhavati 
]ie  becomes  other  than  we  (AB.). 

a.  In  B.  several  local  and  temporal  adjectives:  arvaoina  heloic, 
nrdhva  above,  jihma  aslant  ;  arvauc  before,  paranc  after  ;  e.g.  ydt  kim 
ca^_^arvacmain  adityat  lohaieveris  below  the  sun  (SB. ) ;  eti.smac  catvalad 
urdhvah  svargdm  lokdm  upod  akraman  uincard  from  that  pit  they 
ascended  to   heaven   (SB.);    yajnaj  jihma  iyuh   they    {would  go  obliquely 

from  =)  lose  the  sacrifice  (AB.);  dasa  va  etasmad  arvancas  trivrto,  dasa 
parancah  ten  Trirrls  occur  before  it  and  ten  after  it  (AB.). 

b.  ill  B.  adjectives  in  uka,  which  with  bhu  are  equivalent  to 
a  verb  ;  e.  g.  yajamanat  pasavo  'nutkramuka  bhavanti  the  animals  are 
not  inclined  to  run  away  from  the  sacrificer  (AB.). 

c.  in  B.  numerals,  both  ordinals  and  cardinals  :  with  the  former 
tlie  abl.  expresses  the  point  from  which  the  reckoning  is  made  ; 
e.g.  isvaro  ha^asmad  dvitiyo  va  trtiyo  va  brahmanatam  abhyupaitoh 
the  second  or  third  (in  descent)/rom  him  can  obtain  Brahminliood  (AB.) ;  with 
the  latter  it  expresses  the  figure  by  which  the  complete  number  is 
defective;    e.g.    §kan    na    satd,m    not   a  hundred  by    one  =  ninety-vine. 


318  OUTLINES   OF  SYNTAX  [201-202 

Analogously  with  words  meaning  incomplete  the  al>l.  expresses  the 
amount  of  the  deficiency;  e.g.  ikasmad  aksdrad  dlnaptara  (averse) 
incomplete  hy  one  syllable  (TS. );  tesam  alpakad  evd^agni'r  ^samcita  asa 
their  fire  (altar)  was  not  completely  piled  up  by  a  little  only,  i.e.  was  almost 
completely  piled  up  (SB.\ 

4.  adverbs  meaning  before,  beyond,  outside,  beloiv,  far  from, 
ivlfhout  are  used  prepositionally  with  the  abl.  Those 
occurring  in  V.  only  are :  adhas  beJow,  avas  down  from,  ar6 
7Citliout,  puras  before ;  in  V.  and  B. :  rt6  witliouf,  tiras  apart 
from,  paras  outside,  pura  before  ;  in  B.  only  :  abhyardhas 
far  from;  bahis  outside.     Cp.  177,  3. 

a.  In  B.  some  other  adverbs  with  a  local  or  temporal 
sense  ;  e.  g.  duram  ha  va  asman  mrtyur  bhavati  death  is 
far  from  him  (SB.) ;  tasman  madhyamac  chankor  daksina 
pancadasa  vikraman  pra  kramati  he  strides  forward  fifteen 
steps  to  the  right  of  this  middle  peg  (SB.) ;  prag  ghomat  before 
(making)  the  oblation  (AB.). 

B.  The  abl.  is  used  independently  of  any  particular  class 
of  word  to  express  the  reason  of  an  action  in  the  sense  of 
on  account  of;  e.  g.  ma  nas  tasmad  6naso  deva  ririsah 
let  us  suffer  no  harm,  0  god,  on  account  of  this  sin  (vii.  89"')  ; 
anrtad  vai  tab.  praja  varuno  'grhnat  bi/  reason  of  their  guilt 
Varuna  seised  creatures  (MS.).  Similarly  in  B.  :  tasmad 
therefore  ;  kasmat  wherefore  ? 

Genitive. 

202.  The  genitive  is  a  dependent  case,  being  in  its  main 
uses  connected  with  verbs  and  substantives,  but  also  appear- 
ing with  adjectives  and  adverbs. 

A.  With  verbs  the  gen.  has  a  sense  analogous  to  that  of 
the  ace,  but  differs  here  from  the  latter  in  expressing  that 
the  action  affects  the  object  not  as  a  whole,  but  only  in  part. 
It  is  used  with  verbs  having  the  following  senses : 

a.  rule  over,  dispose  of:  always  with  ksi  and  raj,  nearly 
always  with  irajya  and  is  (rarely  ace).    In  B.  the  only  verb 


202]  GENITIVE  319 

with  this  sense  taking  the  gen.  is  is  have  potver  over  ;  e.  g. 

atha^esam  sarva  ise  then  every  one  has poiver  over  them  (MS.). 

h.  rejoice  in :  always  with  trp,  pri,  vrdh  ;  optionally  with 

kan  and  mad  (also  inst.  and  loc),  and  with  the  caus.  of  pan 

(also  ace). 

a.  In  B.  the  only  verb  of  this  group  taking  the  gen.  is  trp  in  a 
partitive  sense;  e.  g.  dnnasya  trpyati  Ite  refreshes  himself  ivHh  {some)  food 
(f^B.). 

c.  iaJce  note  of:  always  with  2.  kr  sf>cal-  highly  of  and 
a-dhi  iliinTx  about,  care  for ;  alternatively  with  ace. :  cit 
observe,  attend  to,  budh  tal:e  note  of;  adhi-i,  -gam,  -ga 
attend  to,  care  for ;  vid  hnow  about  (with  ace.  liiow  fully) ; 
sru  hear  (gen.  of  person,  ace.  of  thing,  heard).  In  AV. 
kirtaya  mention  and  smr  remember  take  the  gen. 

a.  In  B.  only  three  verbs  of  this  class  are  thus  construed  :  vid  and 
srii  as  in  RV. ,  and  kirtaya  mention. 

d.  jmrtitiveness  (while  the  ace.  with  the  same  verbs 
expresses  full  extent) : 

1.  eat,  drinh :  as  cat  of  ad  cat  (almost  exclusively  with 
ace.) ;  pa  drinh  ;  a.-vrs  f  11  oneself  fall  of,  vi  and  jus  enjoy. 

a.  In  B.  only  as  and  pa  besides-  bhaks  eat  (in  RV.  with  ace.  only) 
take  the  partitive  gen. 

2.  give,  piresent,  sacrifice:  da  give  of,  a-dasasya  and  sak 
present  witli;  pre  give  abundantly  of;  yaj  sacrifice  (ace.  of 
person,  gen.  of  offering),  e.  g.  somasya  tva  yaksi  I  tvill 
worship  thee  (with  a  libation)  of  Soma  (iii.  53^). 

a.  In  B.  yaj  may  be  used  without  ace.  of  the  person  ;  e.  g.  t^smad 
^jyasya^evd  yajet  therefore  he  should  sacrifice  some  butter  (SB.). 

p.  In  B.  several  verbs  having  the  general  sense  of  giving  and  taking, 
not  so  used  in  V.,  come  to  be  used  with  the  gen.  of  the  object  in 
a  partitive  sense :  vap  strew,  hu  offe);  abhi-ghar  powr  unon,  ava-da  cut  off  y<\ 
some  of,  a-s2ut  drii^,  upa-str  spread  over,  ni-han  (AV.)  and  pra-han  striJce, 
vi-khau  dig  up  some  of;  grabh.  take  of  and  in  the  passive  be  seized 
=  suffer  in  (a  part  of  the  bodj') ;  e.  g.  u&  eaksuso  grhe  he  does  not  suffer 
in  his  eye  (MS.)  :  yd  vaco  grhitdh  >rho  suffers  in  his  voice  (MS.). 


320  OUTLINES   OF   SYNTAX  [202 

7.  In  Fj.  anu-bru  iririte  is  used  with  the  dat.  of  tlie  god  and  the  gen. 
of  that  to  which  he  is  invited  ;  e.  g.  agni-somabhyam  m^daso  'nii 
briihi  invite  Agni  and  Soma  to  the  fat  (SB.). 

e.' obtain,  asJc  for:  bhaj  participate  in  (with  ace.  ohtain) ; 
bhiks  hegfor:  i  and  id  imphre  for  (generally  ace.  of  thing  as 
well  as  person)  ;  e.  g.  tarn  imahe  indram  asya  rayah  we 
hnplore  Indra  for  some  of  that  wealth  (vi.  22") ;  iyate  vasu- 
nam  he  is  implored  for  some  of  his  riches  (vii.  32"') ;  also  a-yu 
take  possession  of. 

a.  Of  these  verbs  bhaj  remains  in  use  in  B.  :  with  gen.  =  have  a  share 
in  (with  ace.  receive  as  a  share). 

f.  belong  to :  as  and  bhu,  with  the  gen.  of  the  possessor  in 
both  V.  and  B. ;  e.  g.  asmakam  astu  kevalah  let  him 
exchisiveli/  be  ours  (i.  7^")  ;  atha^abhavat  kevalah  somo 
asya  then  Soma  became  exchisiveh/  his  (vii.  98'');  manor  ha 
va  rsabha  asa  Manu  had  a  bull  (SB.) ;  tasya  satam  jaya 
babhuvuh  he  had  a  hundred  ivives  (AB.). 

B.  The  genitive  is  used  with  two  classes  of  substantives. 

1.  It  depends  on  verbal  substantives  and  is  then  allied  to 
the  gen.  with  verbs  (especially  those  expi'essing  possession). 

a.  The  subjective  gen.,  which  is  equivalent  to  the  agent 
of  the  action  exj)ressed  by  the  cognate  verb  ;  e.  g.  usaso 
vyiistau  at  the  breah  of  daum  =  Avhen  the  dawn  breaks ; 
apakramad  u  ha^eva^esam  etad  bibhayam  cakara  he 
was  afraid  of  their  dejmrture  (^B.)  =  thiii  they  would  run  away. 
It  very  often  occurs  with  datives ;  e.  g.  yajnasya  samrd- 
dhyai /or  the  success  of  the  sacrifice  (TS.)  =  that  the  sacrifice 
might  succeed. 

b.  The  objective  gen.,  which  is  equivalent  to  the  object 
expressed  by  the  cognate  verb  ;  e.  g.  yogo  vajinah  the  >/oking 
of  the  steed  =  he  yokes  the  steed  ;  pura  vrtrasya  vadhat 
before  the  slaughter  of  Vrtra  (SB.)  =  before  he  slew  Vrtra. 
It  often  occurs  with  datives  ;  e.  g.  yajamanasya^ahimsayai 
for  the  non-injmii  of  the  sacrificer  (MS.)  =  in  order  not  to 
injure  the  sacrificer. 


m]  GENITIVE  321 

a.  This  genitive  is  common  with  agent  nouns,  especially  those  in 
tr  ;  e.g.  rayo  data  giver  of  iceulth  (vi.  23'*'; ;  pusa  pasuiiam  prajanayita 
Pusan  is  the  propagator  of  caiiJe  (MS.).  But  in  V.  the  agent  nouns  in  tr 
Avith  few  exceptions  take  the  ace.  when  the  root  is  accented;  e.g. 
data  vasu  one  uito  gives  wealth  (vi,  23^). 

2.  The  gen.  commonly  depends  on  non-verbal  substantives. 
It  may  then  have  two  senses  : 

a.  The  possessive  gen.  ;  e.  g.  v6h  parnam  the  wing  of  the 
J)ird  =  wing  belonging  to  the  bird  ;  devanam  dutah  the 
messenger  of  the  gods.  It  also  appears  with  abstract  nouns 
.  derived  from  such  words ;  e.  g.  ad  id  devanam  lipa 
sakhyam  ayan  then  theg  came  to  friendship)  with  the  gods 
(iv.  33")  =  then  they  became  friends  of  the  gods. 

a.  The  gen.  used  with  the  perf.  pass,  part.,  felt  to  be  the  agent,  is  a 
variety  of  the  possessive  gen.  Already  appearing  a  few  times  in  the 
RV.  it  is  common  in  B.  ;  e.  g.  pfityuh  krita  (MS.)  the  Imight  (wife)  of 
the  husband  =  (the  wife)  bought  by  the  husband, 

/3.  The  gen.  is  similarly  used  with  the  gerundive;  e.g.  anyasya 
balikrd  anyasya^_^adyah  paying  taxes  to  anotlier,  to  he  devoured  Inj  another 
(AB.)'. 

7.  Tlie  gen.  is  freqviently  used  possessively  where  we  w'ould  use  a 
dative  ;  e.  g.  tasya  ha  putro  jajne  a  son  of  his  was  born  -  a  son  was  born 
to  him  (AB.). 

5.  The  gen.  is  occasionally  used  for  the  dative  with  srad  dha  leliere 
and  da  gire  in  the  AB.  This  use  may  have  started  from  the  possessive 
sense. 

l>.  The  partitive  gen.  expresses  a  part  of  the  whole ;  e.g. 
mitro  vai  sivo  devanam  3£iira  is  the  Jcindhj  one  among  the 
gods  (TS.).  If  the  gen.  is  a  plural  of  the  same  word  as  that 
on  which  it  depends  it  is  equivalent  to  a  superlative ;  e.  g. 
sakhe  sakhinam  0  friend  among  friends  =  best  of  friends 
(i.  30");  mantrakrtam  mantrakrt  hest  of  com/posers  of 
hymns  (B.). 

a.  This  gen.  is  in  particular  used  with  comparatives  and  superla- 
tives (including  prathamd,  first,  caram^  last,  &c.) ;  e.  g.  n^  pSra  jigye 
kataris  eanainoh  not  either  of  the  two  of  them  conquered  (vi.  69^) ;  gardabhah 
pasimam  bharabharitamah  the  ass  is  the  hest  hearer  of  burdens  among 
animals  (TS.). 

1819  Y 


322  OUTLINES   OF  SYNTAX  [202 

P.  It  is  used  with  numbers  above  iu-en(y  (in  B.  only  with  sahdsram) 
and  words  expressive  of  a  division  or  a  measure  ;  e.  g.  sastim  asvanam 
(an  aggregate  of)  sixty  horses;  gonam  ardh^m  half  of  (he  coivs;  gdvam 
yuthani  herds  ofcoics.  Sometimes  this  gen.  is  used  by  transference  to 
express  not  a  part,  but  the  whole  ;  as  in  marutam  ganah.  the  host  (con- 
sisting) o/the  Maruts. 

7.  Tlie  gen.  sometimes  expresses  the  material ;  e.  g.  krsnanam 
vrihinam  carum  srapayati  he  cooks  a  mess  of  Uack  rice  (SB. ) ;  et6sam 
vrk.sanam  bhavanti  they  (the  fences)  are  (made  of  the  wood)  of  these 
trees  (SB.).  It  is  used  in  this  sense  with  the  verb  kr  ;  e.g.  yd,  ev^  kds 
ca  vrksdh  phalagrahis  tdsya  karya  ivhatever  tree  bears  fruit,  of  (a  part  of) 
that  it  is  to  be  made  (MS.). 

C.  The  gen.  is  used  with  a  few  adjectives  meaning 
attached  to,  like,  capalle  of,  Jcnoivinr/,  ojfering,  alouncUncj  in: 
priya  dear,  anuvrata  obedient ;  pratyardhi  standing  at  the 
side  of;  anurxi]pai  similar ;  isvara  able  to,  navedas  cognisant 
of;  papri  Icstoiving  abundantly  (partitive  gen.  of  the  thing 
offered,  e.  g.  andhasah  of  the  juice  (i.  52^) ;  and  with  the 
participles,  used  like  adjectives,  purna  ftdl  of,  pipivams 
abounding  in. 

D.  The  gen,  is  used  with  certain  adverbs  having  1.  a  local 
sense :  in  V.  agratas  before  (AV.) ;  in  V.  and  B.  :  daksinatas 
to  the  right  of;  avastad  below,  parastad  aftoye, purastad  before; 
in  B. :  uparistad  behind,  pascad  behind,  puras  before ; 
antikam  near,  nediyas  nearer,  n^distham  nearest. 

a.   In  the  RV.  ax€  far  from  takes  the  gen.  (also  the  abl.). 
li.  In  B.  the  local  adjective  (like  the  local  adverbs)  lidanc  northicard 
of  takes  the  gen. 

2.  a  temporal  sense :  Ida  and  idanim  now  are  used  in  V. 
with  the  genitives  ahnas  and  ahnam  ==  at  the  present  time  of 
day ;  pratar  early  with  the  gen.  ahnas  in  V.  and  with 
ratryas  in  B.  ;  e.  g.  yasya  ratryah  pratar  yaksyamanah 
syat  in  the  morning  of  which  night  he  may  be  about  to  sacrifice 
(MS.). 

3,  a  multiplicative  sense:  in  V.  sakrt  once  with  ahnas 
ofice  a  day ;  tris  thrice  in  trir  dhnas,  trir  a  divah  thrice 


202-203]  GENITIVE  823 

a  flay  and  trir  akt6s  three  times  a  night ;  in  B. :  dvis  twice 
and  tris  thrice  with  samvatsarasya,  twice,  thrice  a  year. 

a.  The  adverbial  iiso  in  V.  of  the  gen.  in  a  temporal  sense  is  perhaps 
derived  from  that  with  multiplicatives  :  aktos,  ksdpas  and  ksapds 
nfa  night;  vastos  and  usasas  of  a  morning. 

Locative. 

203.  This  case  expresses  the  sphere  in  which  an  action 
takes  place,  or  with  verbs  of  motion  the  sphere  which  is 
reached  by  the  action.  Its  sense  includes  not  only  locality 
(both  concrete  and  abstract)  but  persons  and  time.  It  may 
therefore  be  variously  translated  by  in,  on,  at ;  beside,  among, 
in  the  presence  of;  to,  into. 

A.  The  loc,  appears  in  a  general  and  independent  way  in 
the  following  senses : 

1,  Place  :  a.  concrete  ;  e.  g.  divi  in  heaven,  parvate  in  or 
on  the  mountain  (i.  32^) :  sarasvatyam  at  the  Sarasvati 
(iii.  23-') ;  yudhi  in  battle  (i.  8^),  samgram6  id.  (SB.). 

b.  abstract :  asya  sumatau  syama  may  we  be  in  his  good 
graces  (viii.  48^-) ;  tad  indra  te  vase  that,  0  Indra,  is  in 
thy  poivcr  {\n\.  93^) ;  yd  adityanam  bhavati  pranitavi  ivho 
is  in  the  guidance  of  the  Adityas  (ii.  27") ;  vajrasya  yat 
patane  padi  susnah  when  upon  the  flight  of  the  bolt  Susna 
fell  (vi.  20') ;  ghrtakirtau  at  the  mention  of  (the  word) 
ghee  (SB.). 

2.  Persons  :  e.  g.  yat  kim  ca  duritam  mayi  whatever  sin 
there  is  in  me  (i.  23^^) ;  pipaya  sa  sravasa  martyesu  he 
abounds  in  fame  among  mortals  (vi.  10") ;  yat  stho  druhyavy 
anavi  turvase  yadau,  huv6  vam  whether  ye  two  are  beside 
(with)  Bruhyu,  Ami,  TurvaSa  (or)  Yadu,  I  call  you  (viii.  10"') ; 
vayam  syama  varune  anagah  may  we  be  guiltless  in  the  eyes 
of  Varuua  (vii.  87') ;  asmin  pusyantu  gopatau  let  them 
prosper  under  this  herdsman  (x.  19'). 

8.  Time  :  here  the  loc.  expresses  that  an  action  takes 
place  within  the  limits  of  the  time  mentioned  ;  e.  g.  usaso 


v2 


324  OUTLINES   OF   SYNTAX  [203-204 

vyustau  at  the  flush  of  dawn  ;  usasi  in  the  morning  (in  B. 
pratar  is  used  instead) ;  dyavi-dyavi  every  dap  (not  used  in 
B.) ;  trir  ahan  three  times  in  the  day  (in  B.  gen.  only) ;  jayate 
masi-masi  he  is  born  (once)  in  every  (successive)  month 
(x.  523). 

a.  This  temporal  use  sometimes  comes  to  mean  that  something 
happens  at  the  end  of  the  period  ;  e.  g.  samvatsara  iddm  adya  vy 
akhyata  ye  have  opened  your  eyes  now  io-dcty  (for  the  first  time)  i7i  a  year 
(i.  161")  =  ai.  the  end  of  a  year  ;  tatah  samvatsar^  piirusah  sam  abhavat 
thence  arose  in  (=  at  the  end  of)  a  year  a  man  (SB.). 

4.  Adverbially.  A  few  substantives  and  adjectives  are 
thus  used  ;  e.  g.  agre  often  occurs  in  the  sense  of  in  front 
and  at  first,  appearing  even  in  compounds  (e.  g.  agre-ga 
going  hefore,  agre-pa  drinldng  first) ;  in  SB.  the  loc.  of 
ksipra  quich  is  several  times  thus  employed,  e.g.  ksipre 
ha  yajamano  'mum  lokam  iyat  the  sacrificer  ivoutd  speedily 
go  to  yonder  world. 

204.  B.  The  loc.  is  connected  with  different  classes  of 
words  by  which  it  may  be  said  to  be  governed. 

1.  It  is  specially  connected  with  verbs  expressing : 
■  a.  in  V. :  rejoice  in ;  groiv,  prosper ;  Mess,  injure  in  respect 
of;  implore,  involve  for  (i,  hu) ;  receive  from  ;  e.g.  visve  deva 
havisi  madayadhvam  do  ye,  0  all-gods,  rejoice  in  the  oblation 
(vi.  52'^j ;  tavisisu  vavrdhe  he  grew  in  strength  (i.  52-)  ; 
ya  esam  bhrtyam  rnadhat  sa  jivat  he  ivho  icill  succeed  in 
their  support,  shall  live  (i.  84"^) ;  prava  nas  tok6  bless  us  in 
children  (viii.  23'-) ;  ma  nas  tdk.6  ririsah  injure  us  not  in  our 
children  (i.  114*);  agnim  tok6  tanaye  sasvad  imahe  Agni 
we  constantly  implore  for  children  and  for  grandchildren 
(viii.  71'^) ;  adha  hi  tva  havamahe  tanaye  gosu^apsii  for 
tve  involve  thee  for  offspring,  cows,  water  (vi.  19^^) ;  dev^sii^ 
amrtatvam  anasa  ye  received  immortality  {among  =)  from  the 
gods  (iv.  36*) ; 

in  V.  and  B. :  let  share  in  (a-bhaj)  and  struggle  for  (sprdh, 
rarely  in  V.) ;    e.  g.  yan  abhajo  mariita  indra  some   the 


204]  LOCATIVE  325 

Maruts  wJiom  thoit,  0  Inclm,  didst  allow  to  share  in  Soma 
(iii.  SS'-*) ;  ami  no  'syam  prthivyam  a  bhajata  let  us  have 
a  share  in  this  earth  (SB.);  adityas  ca  ha  va  angirasas  ca 
svarge  loke  'spardhanta  the  Adityas  and  the  Angirases 
struggled  for  (the  possession  of)  the  heavenly  world  (AB.) ; 

in  B.  :  request  (is),  aslc  (prach),  call  in  question  (mimams) ; 
e.  g,  sa  ha^iyam  devesu  sutyayam  apitvam  ise  she  re- 
quested from  the  gods  a  share  in  the  Sotna  feast  (SB.) ;  te  devesv 
aprchanta  they  inquired  of  the  gods  (PB.). 

b.  in  V.  and  B. :  motion,  to  indicate  tli§  place  that  is 
reached.  The  case  may  here  be  translated  by  to,  into,  upon. 
Such  verbs  in  V.  are  :  go  (gam),  enter  (a-^?^is),  ascend  (a-ruh), 
descend  (ava-vyadh),  fow  (ars,  dhav),  ^jo«/"  (sic,  hu),  put 
(dha,  kr) ;  e.  g.  sa  id  devesu  gachati  (i.  1^)  that  goes  to 
[=  reaches)  the  gods  (while  devan  gachati  would  mean  goes 
in  the  direction  of  the  gods) ;  yo  martyesv  it  krnoti  devan 
who  brings  the  gods  to  mortals  (i.  77');  viryam  yajamane 
dadhati  he  puts  energy  into  the  sacrificer  (TS.) ;  na  va  esa 
gramy^sn  pasusu  hitah  he  {is  not  placed  among  =)  does  not 
belong  to  the  tame  animals  (TS.).  In  B.  verbs  meaning  to 
throw  at  are  especially  common  with  the  loc. 

c.  desire,  to  indicate  the  goal  or  object  aimed  at :  grdh  be 
eager,  yat  strire,  a-sams  hope  ;  e.g.  annesu  jagrdhur  they  are 
eager  for  food  (ii.  23'") ;  divi  svano  yatate  the  sound  soars  to 
heaven  (x.  75") ;  a  tu  na  indra  samsaya  gosv  asvesu  pray 
give  us  hope,  Indra,  of  cotvs  and  horses  (i.  29') ;  agnihotrini 
devata  a  samsante  the  gods  place  their  hope  in  the  maintainer 
of  the  sacrificial  fire  (MS.). 

2.  The  loc.  is  also  used  to  some  extent  connected  with 
nouns : 

a.  verbal  nouns  (substantives  and  adjectives)  derived  from 
verbs  taking  that  case ;  e.  g.  na  tasya  vacy  api  bhago  asti 
he  has  no  share  in  speech  (x.  71") ;  somo  bhiitv  avapanesv 
abhagah  let  Soma  be  a  particiqMtor  in  drinking  bouts  (i.  136^) ; 
suta  it  tvara  nimisla  indra  some  thou  art  attached,  0  Indra, 


326  OUTLINES   OF  SYNTAX  [204-205 

to  the  jiressed  Soma  (vi.  23') ;  tasminn  eva^eta  nimislatama 
iva  to  hhn  these  (women)  are  most  devoted  (SB.). 

h.  ordinary  adjectives :  in  V.  priya  and  caru  dear ;  e.  g. 
priyah  surye  priyo  agna  bhavati  he  will  he  dear  to  Surya, 
dear  to  Agnl  (v.  37^) ;  carur  mitre  varune  ca  dear  to  Mitra 
and  Varum  (ix.  61^) ;  in  B.  dhruva  firm  ;  e.  g.  rastram  eva^ 
asmin  dhruvam  akah  he  has  made  the  sovereignty  estallisJted 
in  him  (TS.). 

3.  The  loc.  is  used  with  a  few  prepositions :  in  V.  a  in, 
at,  on,  and  (rarely)  api  near,  in,  and  upa  near  to,  at,  upon,  as 
well  as  the  prepositional  adverb  saca  beside,  ivith  ;  in  V.  and 
B.  adhi  on  and  antar  within  (ep.  176.  2 ;  177,  5). 

Locative  and  Genitive  Absolute. 

205.  1.  The  absolute  construction  of  the  loc,  in  which 
the  case  is  always  accompanied  by  a  participle,  started  from 
the  ordinary  use  of  the  loc.  Combined  with  a  i^articiple  it 
came  to  be  regarded  as  a  temporal  or  qualifying  clause 
where  the  case  alone  could  not  be  employed.  Thus  beside 
usasi  at  daivn  could  appear  uchantyam  usasi  at  dawn  as  it 
shines  forth,  which  then  acquired  the  independent  sense 
■tchen  dawn  shines  fort  J t.  (i.  184').  As  regards  the  participles 
used  in  this  construction,  the  future  never  occurs  ;  the  perf. 
act.  is  quite  isolated  ;  the  perf.  pass.  part,  is  somewhat 
doubtful  in  V.,  but  undoubted  in  B.  ;  while  the  pres.  part, 
is  in  fully  developed  use  in  V.  as  well  as  B. 

a.  An  example  of  the  perf.  part.  act.  in  vant  used 
absolutely  is :  asitavaty  atithav  asniyat  (AV.  ix.  6^^)  the 
guest  having  eaten,  he  may  eat  (cp.  161). 

h.  The  perf.  part.  pass,  appears  in  the  RV.  in  several 
expressions,  such  as  jat6  agnau,  stirn6  barhisi,  sut6  some, 
in  which  the  loc.  probably  still  has  its  ordinary  sense ;  e.  g. 
visvam  adhag  ayudham  iddh6  agnau  he  hurnt  every  weapon 
in  the  kindled  fire  (ii.  15^) ;  yo  asvasya  dadhikravno  akarit 


205]  LOCATIVE   ABSOLUTE  327 

samiddhe  agna  iisaso  vyustau  who  has  honoured  the  steed 

BadhUiravan  beside  the  Icindledfire  at  the  flush  of  Dawn  (iv.  39^), 

possibly  when  the  fire  is  hindled.     In  other  examples  the 

absolute  sense  seems  more  likely  :  yad  im  enam  usato  abhy 

avarsit  trsyavatah  pravrsy  agatayam  when  it  has  rained 

upon   the  eager  thirsty  ones,  the  rainy  season  having  come 

(vii.  103'');  especially  in  yan  marutah  surya  udite  madatha 

when  ye,   0  Maruts,  are  exhilarated  at  the  rising  of  the  sun 

(v.  54'°).     Here  surye  could  not  be  used  alone/  while  the 

loc.    of  time    would    be    expressed   by  lidita  suryasya   at 

sunrise. 

a.  In  B.  the  absolute  use  with  the  pert",  part.  pass,  is  much  more 
pronounced  ;  e.  g.  uditesu  ndksatresu  vacam  vi  srjati  ivhen  the  stars 
have  risen  he  sets  free  his  voice  (TS.) ;  s£  enah  svo  bhut6  yajate  he  sacrifices 
fa  them  ichen  the  morning  has  appeared  (TS.) ;  krit6  some  maitravarunaya 
dandam  prd,  yachati  when  the  Soma  has  been  bovght  he  hawls  the  staff  to  the 
Maitrdvaruna  priest  (TS.);  tdsmad  gardabh^  pu^a^_^ayusah  pramite 
bibhyati  therefore  one  is  frightened  when  a  donketj  has  died  before  its  lime 
(TS.).  The  substantive  has  sometimes  to  be  supplied  ;  e.g.  sa  hovaca  : 
hato  vrtro  ;  yad  dhate  kuryata  tdt  kuruta^iti  he  said  :  Vrtra  is  dead  ; 
what  you  would  do,  if  he  were  dead,  that  do  (SB.). 

c.  Of  the  pres.  part,  with  the  loc.  in  the  absolute  sense 
there  are  many  examples  in  V.  ;  e.  g.  indram  pratar  hava- 
maha  indram  prayati^adhvar^  Indra  ve  involve  early, 
Indra  when  the  sacrifice  proceeds  (i.  16-') ;  sarasvatim  deva- 
yanto  havante  sarasvatim  adhvare  tayamane  fnen  devoted 
to  the  gods  invoice  Sarasvatt,  Sarasvati  tvhile  the  sacrifice  is 
extended  (x.  17') ;  ta  vam  adya  tav  aparam  huvema^ 
uchantyam  usasi  so  you  two  to-day,  so  you  two  in  future  ive 
ivoidd  invoke  when  Dawn  shines  fotih  (i.  184'). 

a.  Similarly  in  B  :  yajiiamukhe-yajnamukhe  vai  kriydmane  yaj- 
iiam  rdksamsi  jighamsanti  ahvays  ivhen  the  commencement  of  the  sacrifice 
is  being  made,  the  Baksases  seek  to  destroy  the  sacrifice  (TS.)  ;  some  hany^- 
mane  yajn.6  hanyate  ichen  Soma  is  destroyed,  the  sacrifice  is  destroyed  (TS.) ; 

^  Because  the  sense  rejoice  in  the  sun  would  be  unnatixral,  though  the 
construction  of  mad  with  the  loc.  is  normal  (cp.  204,  1  a). 


328  OUTLINES   OF  SYNTAX  [205-206 

tasmad  agnicid  varsati  na  dhavet  therefore  the  fire-piler  should  not  run 
xvhen  it  rains  (TS.) ;  tim  etat  pratyayatyam  ratrau  sayim  upatisth.anta 
so  they  approached  him  in  the  evening  lohen  night  returned  (SB.). 

2.  The  genitive  absolute  is  unknown  in  V.,  but  has 
ah-eady  come  into  use  in  B.  It  arose  from  the  possessive 
genitive  which  acquired  an  independent  syntactical  value 
when  accompanied  by  a  (pres.  or  perf.  pass.)  participle  much 
in  the  same  way  as  the  loc.  The  substantive  is  sometimes 
omitted.  Examples  are :  tasya^alabdhasya^  sa  vag  apa 
cakrama  he  being  sacrificed,  this  voice  departed  {iiB.) ;  tasmad 
apam  taptanam  pheno  jayate  therefore,  zvhen  tvater  is  heated, 
foam  arises  (SB.) ;  sa  eta  vipruso  'janayata  ya  imali 
skuyamanasya  vipravante  he  (Agni)  produced  those  sparls 
which  dart  about  when  (the  fire)  is  stirred  (MS.) ;  tesam  ha^ 
uttisthatam  uvaca  while  these  stood  up  he  said  (AB.).  In 
the  first  three  of  the  above  examples  the  close  relationship 
of  the  absolute  to  the  possessive  case  is  still  apparent. 

Participles. 

206.  Participles  are  of  a  twofold  nature  inasmuch  as 
they  share  the  characteristics  of  both  noun  and  verb. 
In  form  they  are  adjectives  both  in  inflexion  and  concord. 
On  the  other  hand  they  not  only  govern  cases  like  the  verb, 
but  also  indicate  differences  of  voice  and  generally  speaking 
retain  the  distinctions  of  time  expressed  by  the  tenses  to 
which  they  belong.  They  are  as  a  rule  used  appositionally 
with  substantives,  qualifying  the  main  action  and  equiva- 
lent  to  subordinate  clauses.  They  may  thus  express  a  rela- 
tive, temporal,  causal,  concessive,  final,  or  hypothetical 
sense.  The  verbal  character  of  participles  formed  directly 
from  the  root  (and  not  from  tense  stems)  is  restricted  (with 
certain  exceptions)  to  the  passive  voice  in  sense,  and  to  past 
and  future  time  ;  while  owing  to  their  passive  nature  they 
are  not  construed  with  an  ace.  of  the  object,  Init  only  with 
the  inst.  of  the  agent  or  means. 


207-208]  PARTICIPLES  _  329 

207.  The  pres,  part,  is  occasionally  used  in  V.  by  anaco- 
luthon  as  a  finite  verb  ;  e.g.  asmad  aham  tavisad  isamana 
indrad  bhiya  maruto  rdjamanah  /  (am)  fleeing  from  this 
mighty  one,  fremhliiig  with  fear  of  Indra,  ye  Maruts  (i.  171*). 
This  use  does  not  seem  to  be  found  in  B. 

a.  The  pies.  part,  is  used  with  the  verbs  i  go,  car  move, 
as  remain,  stha  stand  as  auxiliaries  to  express  continued 
duration  in  V.  and  B.  ;  e.  g.  visvam  anyo  abhieaksana  eti 
tlie  other  (Pusan)  goes  on  watching  the  universe  (ii.  40^)  j 
vicakasac  candrama  naktam  eti  the  moon  goes  on  shining 
brightly  at  night  (i.  24^") ;  te  'sya  grhah  pasava  upamurya- 
mana  iyuh  his  house  and  cattle  would  go  on  being  destroyed 
(SB.) ;  tvam  hi .  . .  6ko  vrtra  carasi  jighnamanah  ybr  thoit 
alone  goest  on  Idlling  the  Yrtras  (iii.  80^) ;  t6  'rcantah  sram- 
yantas  eeruh  they  went  on  praying  and  fasting  (SB.) ;  ream 
tvah  posam  aste  pupusvan  the  oneliceps producing  abundance 
of  verses  (x.  7U^) ;  somam  eva^etat  pibanta  asate  they  thus 
Iceep  on  drinJcing  Soma  (TS.) ;  ucchvancamana  prthivi  su 
tisthatu  let  the  earth  keep  on  yaioning  wide  (x.  18'-) ;  vitrmha- 
nas  tisthanti  they  keep  conflicting  (TS.). 

208.  The  past  passive  participle  in  ta  is  very  frequently 
used  as  a  finite  verb  ;  e.  g.  tatam  me  apas  tad  u  tayate 
punah  my  work  is  done  and  it  is  being  done  again  (i.  110')  ; 
na  tvavam  indra  kas  cana  na  jato  na  janisyate  no  one  is 
like  thee,  0  Indra,  he  has  not  been  born,  and  he  ivill  not  be  born 
(i.81^) ;  used  impersonally :  sraddhitam  te  mahata  indriyaya 
confidence  has  been  placed  in  thy  great  might  (i.  104'^). 

Similarly  in  B.  :  ista  devata  dtha  katama  et6  the  gods  have  been  wor- 
shipped, hut  ivhich  are  these  gods?  (TS. );  also  in  suboi'dinate  clauses: 
tdsmin  ydd  apanuam,  grasitam  evd.^asya  tfit  what  has  got  into  him,  that 
has  been  devoured  by  him  (TS.). 

a.  The  perf.  pass.  part,  is  not  infrequently  used  with 
forms  of  as  and  bhu  as  auxiliaries  constituting  a  periphrastic 
mood  or  tense  in  V. ;  e.  g.  yuktas  te  astu  daksinah  let  thy 
right  (steed)  be  yoked  (i.  82"') ;   dhumas  te  ketur  abhavad 


330  OUTLINES   OF   SYNTAX  [208-209 

divi  sritah.  the  snioJce,   thy  banner,  {was  raised  =)  arose  to 
heaven  (v.  11^). 

h.  Such  forms  (pres,  and  aor.  ind.  of  bhu,  impf  and  peif. 
ind.  and  opt.  of  as)  make  regular  past  and  present  tenses  and 
the  opt.  mood  in  B.;  e.g.  bhuyasibhir  ha^asya^ahutibhir 
istam  bhavati  bij  him  sacrifice  has  been  made  ivith  several 
offerings  (AB.) ;  devasurah  samyatta  asan  the  gods  and 
Asuras  were  engaged  in  conflict  (TS.) ;  tad  va  rsinam  anu- 
srutam  asa  that  was  heard  bg  the  seers  (SB.) ;  tasmad  vidhrta 
adhvano  'bhuvan  therefore  the  roads  have  been  divided  (TS.). 

209.  Future  Participles  Passive.  There  are  six  of 
these  :  one,  that  in  ayya  occurs  in  the  RV.  only  ;  three, 
those  in  enya,  ya,  and  tva,  in  V.  and  in  B. ;  two,  those  in 
tavya  and  aniya  in  V.  (but  not  in  the  RV.)  and  in  B. 
The  commonest  sense  expressed  by  these  verbal  nouns  is 
necessity  ;  but  various  allied  meanings,  such  as  obligation, 
fitness,  certain  futurity,  and  possibility,  are  also  frequent. 
Four  of  them  are  construed  with  the  inst.  of  the  agent  (the 
gen.  and  dat.  sometimes  appearing  instead),  while  the  forms 
in  tva  and  aniya  are  never  found  connected  with  a  case. 

1.  The  commonest  of  these  gerundives  is  that  in  ya  ; 
sadyo  jajnano  havyo  babhiiva  as  soon  as  born  he  became 
one  to  be  invoiced  (viii.  96^^).  It  often  appears  without  a 
verb  ;  e.  g.  visva  hi  vo  namasyani  vandya  namani  deva 
uta  yajniyani  vah  all  your  names,  ye  gods,  are  adorable, 
worthy  of  praise,  and  ivorshipful  (x.  63^).  The  agent  may  be 
expressed  by  the  inst.,  dat.,  or  gen.;  e.g.  tvam  nrbhir 
havyo  visvadha^asi  thou  art  always  to  be  involed  by  men 
(vii.  22') ;  asmabhir  u  nu  praticaksya^abhut  she  has 
become  visible  {by=)  to  us  (i.  113^^) ;  sakha  sakhibhya  idyah 
a  friend  to  be  praised  by  friends  (i.  75^) ;  ya  6ka  id  dhavyah 
carsaninam  who  alone  is  to  be  invoiced  of  men  (vi.  22'). 

a.  In  B.  the  agent  may  be  in  the  inst.  or  gen.,  but  not  in  the  dat. ; 
thus  tdsmai  deyam  means  io  him  gifts  should  be  given  (SB.).  This 
example  also  illustrates  the  impersonal  use  of  this  gerundive  in  B., 


209]  GERUNDIVE  381 

ii  use  unkuowu  to  the  RV.     This  gerundive  is  always  without  a  verb, 
being  unaccompanied  by  forms  of  as  or  bhu  in  B.  ;  e.  g.  bahu  d^yam 

■much  (is)  to  he  (jicen  (MS.). 

2.  Tlie  gerundive  in  tva  in  the  RV.  implies  necessity  or 
possibility  and  is  often  used  in  contrast  with  the  past ;  but 
it  is  not  found  accompanied  by  a  verb  (as  or  bhu)  or  a  noun 
expressing  the  agent ;  e.  g.  ripavo  hantvasah.  the  enemy  are 
to  he  Villed  (iii.  30^^) ;  yo  nantvany  anaman  ny  ojasa  who 
hy  his  might  lent  what  could  he  lent  (ii.  24^) ;  tad  visvam 
abhibhur  asi  yaj  jatam  yac  ca  jantvam  thou  surpassest  all 
that  has  leen  lorn  and  that  -is  to  he  lorn  (viii.  89'^). 

a.  The  only  meaning  that  seems  to  be  expressed  by  this  gerundive 
in  B.  is  possibility;  e.g.  snatvam  udakdm  water  that  can  be  bathed  in 
(6b.);  no  asya^anyad  dhotvam  asit  pranat  and  he  had  nothing  else  that 
could  be  offered  but  breath  (MS.). 

3.  The  gerundive  in  ayya,  found  in  the  RV.  only,  some- 
times appears  accompanied  by  an  agent  in  the  inst.  or  the 
dat.  ;  e.  g.  daksayyo  nrbhih  to  le  propitiated  ly  men  (i.  129^) ; 
daksayyo  dasvate  dama  a  who  is  to  Ic  ])ropitiated  ly  the 
pious  man  in  his  house  (ii.  4^). 

4.  The  form  in  enya,  almost  restricted  to  the  RV,  may 
be  accompanied  by  an  agent  in  the  inst.  ;  e.  g.  agnir  ilenyo 
gira  Agni  to  le  praised  with  song  (i.  79^) ;  abhyayams6nya 
bhavatam  manlsibhih  le  ivilling  to  le  drawn  near  ly  the 
devout  (i.  34^). 

a.  It  is  once  or  twice  also  found  in  B.  ;  thus  vacam  udyasam  susrti- 
s^nyam  I  imuld  utter  a  speech  worthy  to  be  heard  (TS.). 

5.  The  gerundive  in  tavya,  which  is  not  found  in  the 
RV.  at  all,  occurs  only  twice  in  the  AV. :  thus  na  brahmano 
himsitavyah  a  Brahmin  is  not  to  le  injured  (AV.  v.  18*^). 

a.  In  B.  it  is  frequent  and  used  much  in  the  same  way  as  the  form 
in  ya  ;  here  it  is  also  used  impersonally  and  with  the  agent  in  the 
inst.  ;  e.  g.  putro  yajayayitavyah  a  son  must  be  made  to  sacrifice  (MS.)  ; 
agnicita  paksino  B^j^^asitavyam  anAcjnkit  should  not  eat  {any  part)  of  a 
bird  (^MS.),  pasuvrateua  bhavitavyam  (MS.)  he  should  act  after  the  manner  of 


332  OUTLINES   OF   SYNTAX  [209-210 

cattle   (more  literally  :    action  should  he  taken  hij  him  as  one  folloioing  the 
manner  of  cattle). 

6.  The  form  in  aniya,  which  is  rare  in  both  V.  and  B., 
does  not  occur  at  all  in  the  EV.,  and  only  twice  in  the  prose 
of  the  AV.  Expressing  only  suitability  or  possibility,  and 
never  used  either  with  an  inst.  or  impersonally,  it  has 
hardly  attained  the  full  value  of  a  gerundive  even  in  B.  ; 
e.  g.  upajivaniyo  bhavati  he  is  one  ivho  may  he  subsisted  on 
(AV.) ;  abhicaraniya  Iktble  to  he  hewitchcd  (SB.) ;  ahavaniya 
suitahle  to  he  offered  to  (AB.). 

Gerund  or  Indeclinable  Participle. 

210.  The  forms  of  the  gerund,  ending  in  tvij  tva,  tvaya 
(cp.  163)  and  in  ya  or  tya  (164)  are  synonymous,  expressing 
an  action  that  is  past  before  that  of  the  finite  verb  begins. 
It  regularly  refers  to  what  is  regarded  as  the  subject  of  the 
sentence  ;  e.  g.  giidhvi  tamo  jy6tisa^_^usa  abodhi  having 
hidden  aicay  the  darkness,  Dawn  has  awakened  with  light 
(vii.  80") ;  yuktva  haribhyam  iipa  yasad  arvak  having 
yoJxd  (them)  mag  he  come  hither  with  his  two  hags  (v.  40^) ; 
striyam  drstvaya  kitavam  tatapa  having  seen  a  woman  it 
pains  the  gamhler  (x.  34^^)=  tlic  gambler,  having  seen  a  ivoman, 
is  pained ;  piba  nisadya  drink,  after  having  sat  doivn  (i.  177^) ; 
yo  hanti  satrum  abhitya  who  slays  the  foe  after  having 
attacked  him  (ix.  55"*). 

a.  The  usage  in  B.  is  similar  ;  e.g.  tSsmat  suptva  prajah  pra  budh- 
■yante  therefore  creatures  awake  after  having  slept  (TS.);  tam  ha,_^enam 
drstva  bhir  viveda  having  seen  him  fear  seized  him  =  having  seen  him  he 
became  afraid  (SB.).  The  gerund  is,  however,  here  found  loosely  con- 
strued in  various  ways  not  occurring  in  V.  Thus  it  refers  in  sense  to 
the  agent  implied  by  the  future  j^art.  pass,  in  tavya  or  ya  used  predi- 
catively  as  a  finite  verb ;  e.  g.  agnihotrah^vanim  pratapya  hasto 
'vadheyah  his  hand  (is)  to  he  put  into  it  (by  the  holder)  after  having  heated 
the  ftre-sacrifce  ladle  (M.S.).  Still  looser  is  the  connexion  in  such  sen- 
tences as  the  following  :  tS  pas^va  osadhir  jagdhva^apdh  pitva  tata 
esi,  r^sah  sdm  bhavati  the  beasts  Iiaving  eaten  the  plants  and  drunk  -water — 


210-211]  GERUND  S33 

(hen  this  vital  sap  arises  (6b.)  =  then  acquire  this  vital  sn}).  The  past  sense 
of  the  gerund  is  often  emphasized  by  the  particle  d,tha  then  being 
placed  immediately  after  it.  The  gerund  is  here  sometimes  equiva- 
lent to  the  finite  verb  of  a  subordinate  clause  ;  e.  g.  atithyena  vai 
deva  istva  tant  sam^d  avindat  after  the  gods  had  sacrificed  ivith  the  rite  of 
hoHpitahle  reception,  discord  came  upon  them  (SB.);  similarly  with  the  verb 
naan  think  :  et&d  vai  devah  prapya  raddhva^_^iva^amanyanta  tlie  gods, 
having  obtained  this,  thought  thai  they  had  as  good  as  won  (SB.). 

b.  The  gerund  in  am,  which  is  always  a  compound,  and 

the  first  member  of  which  is  nearly  always  a  preposition, 

exjDresses  a  simultaneous  action  performed  by  the  subject  of 

the  finite  verb  of  the  sentence.     Being  a  cognate  ace.  used 

adverbially  it  is  only  beginning  to  be  used  as  a  gerund  in 

late  V.  ;  e.  g.  tantram  yuvati  abhyakramam  vayatah  the 

iico  maidens  weave  the  web  while  going  iip  to  it  (AV.). 

a.  In  B.  it  has  become  common  ;  e.  g.  abhikramam  juhoti  (TS.) 
he  sacrifices  while  ap2)roaching  (the  fire).  This  gerund  is  sometimes  used 
with  as,  i,  or  car  to  express  continued  action  ;  e.  g.  t6  parapatam 
asata  they  kept  flying  away  (MS.). 

Infinitive. 

211.  The  normal  use  of  this  form  is  to  supplement  the 
general  statement  of  the  sentence  in  a  final  {in  order  to)  or 
a  consequential  (so  as  to)  sense.  The  infinitive  is,  however, 
sometimes  dependent  on  a  particular  word  in  the  sentence, 
usually  a  verb,  occasionally  a  noun  :  it  then  loses  some  of  its 
full  meaning,  as  in  other  languages  after  an  auxiliary.  The 
object  when  it  is  expressed  is  generally  in  the  accusative. 

1.    Dative  Infinitive. 

a.  The  various  forms  of  this  infinitive  govern  either  an 
ace.  or  (by  attraction)  a  dat.,  sometimes  (according  to  the 
nature  of  the  verb)  another  case ;  e.  g.  indraya^arkam 
juhva  sam  anje,  viram  danaukasam  vandadhyai  for 
Indra  I  tvith  my  tongue  adorn  a  song,  to  praise  the  bountiful 
hero  (i.  61°) ;  tvam  akrnor  dustaritu  saho  visvasmai  sahase 
sahadhyai   thou  didst  display  irresistible  power  to  overcome 


334  OUTLINES   OF   SYNTAX  [-211 

crenj  poivcr  (vi.  1^);  ava  sya  sura^adhvano  na^ante  'smin 
no  adya  savane  mandadhyai  unyoke,  0  hero,  as  at  the  end 
of  a  journey,  to  delight  in  this  our  Soma  pressing  to-day  (iv.  16^) ; 
abhud  u  param  etave  pantha  the  path  has  appeared,  to 
(enable  us  to)  go  to  the  farther  shore  (i.  46^^) ;  a  no  nava 
matinam  yatam  paraya  gantave  do  ye  two  come  to  us  with 
the  boat  of  our  hymns,  to  go  to  the  farther  shore  (i.  46") ;  indram 
codaya  datave  magham  urge  Indra  to  give  bounty  (ix.  75'^) ; 
indram  avardhayann  ahaye  hantava  u  they  strengthened 
Indra  to  slay  the  dragon  (v.  31"*) ;  a  ta  etu  manah  piinah 
jivase  jyok  ca  suryam  drs6  let  thy  spirit  return  {to  live  =) 
that  thou  mayest  live  and  long  see  the  sun  (x.  57^) ;  sisite  srnge 
raksase  vinikse  he  sharpens  his  horns  in  order  to  pierce  the 
demon  (v.  2^) ;  sadyas  cin  mahi  davane  to  give  much  at 
once  (viii.  A.Q'^^) ;  pra  yad  bharadhve  suvitaya  davane 
when  ye  proceed  to  give  welfare  (v.  59^) ;  amitran  prtsu 
turvane  to  overcome  foes  in  battle  (vi.  46*^) ;  atha,_,upa  pra^ 
aid  yudhaye  dasyum  then  he  advanced  to  fight  the  demon 
(v.  30^) ;  tav  asmabhyam  drsaye  sux'yaya  punar  datam 
asum  may  these  two  give  us  back  our  breath  that  we  may  see 
the  sun  (x.  14^^) ;  devo  no  atra  savita  nu^artham  prasavid 
dvipat  pra  catuspad  ityai  here  god  Savitr  has  now  urged  on 
our  bipeds,  on  our  quadrupeds  to  go  to  their  work  (i.  124^) ; 
abodhi  hota  yajathaya  devan  the  priest  has  awakened  to 
worship  the  gods  (v.  1^). 

b.  The  dat.  inf.  not  infrequently  depends  on  a  jDarticular 
word  in  the  sentence ;  e.  g.  ta  vam  vastuni^usmasi  ga- 
madhyai  tve  desire  to  go  to  those  abodes  of  you  two  (i.  154^); 
dadhrvir  bharadhyai  strong  to  carry  (vi.  66^) ;  cikid  nasaya- 
dhyai  understanding  to  destroy  (viii.  97^*) ;  agnim  dv6so 
yotavai  no  grnimasi  we  implore  Agni  to  tvnrd  off  hostility 
from  us  (viii.  71^'') ;  t6  hi  putraso  aditer  vidur  dv6samsi 
y6tave/o>'  those  sons  of  Aditi  know  how  to  tvard  off  hostilities 
(viii.  18^) ;  tvam  indra  sravitava  apas  kali  thou,  0  Indra, 
hast  made  the  ivaters  to  floio  (vii.  21^) ;   vidyama  tasya  t© 


211]  INFINITIVE  335 

vayam  akuparasya  da  vane  may  we  know  this  of  thee  who  art 
■inexhaustible  to  give  (v.  39^) ;  bhiyase  mrgam  kah  he  has 
made  the  monster  to  fear  (v.  29*) ;  jajanus  ca  rajase  and  they 
created  (him)  to  rule  (viii.  97^") ;  kavimr  ichami  samdrse 
I  wish  to  see  the  poets  (iii.  38^). 

a.  The  dat.  inf.  has  sometimes  a  passive  force  ;  e.g.  a  vo  vahistho 
vahatu  stavadhyai  rd.thah  may  your  most  swift  car  bring  you  hither  to  he 
praised  (vii.  37^) ;  girbhih  sakhayam  gam  ni  dohdse  huve  with  songs  I 
call  my  friend  like  a  cow  to  be  milked  (vi.  45^)  ;  esa  purutSma  drs€  kd.ni 
she  here  that  constantly  returns  (so  as)  to  be  seen  (i.  124^).  This  sense  is 
especially  noticeable  In  the  infinitives  in  tavai,  tave,  and  e,  which 
when  used  predicatively  (as  a  rule  with  the  negative  n£)  are  equiva- 
lent to  a  future  part,  pass.^  witli  the  copula  ;  e.  g.  stus6  sa  vam  ratih'^ 
thai  bounty  of  yours  is  to  be  praised  (i.  122'') ;  nd,isa  gdvyiitir  ^pabhartava  u 
this  pasture  (is)  not  to  be  taken  away  (x,  14^);  ydsya  nd,  radhah  p^ryetave 
whose  treasure  is  not  to  be  surpassed  (viii.  24^^)  ;  nd,_^asmaliaai  asti  tdt 
td.ra  adityaso  atiskdde  this  our  seal,  0  Adityas,  is  not  to  be  overlooked 
(viii.  67*') ;  ni,  pramiye  savitur  d^ivyasya  ti,t  this  (work)  of  the  divine 
Savitr  (is)  indestructible  (iv.  54*). 

j3.  The  agent  (or  instrument)  of  the  action  expressed  by  the  inf.  is 
pi\t  in  the  inst.  or  gen.  when  there  is  a  passive  sense  ;  e.  g.  n^^anyina 
stomo  vasistha  £nvetave  vah  your  laudation,  0  Vasisthas,  is  not  to  be 
eqitalled  by  another  (vii.  33')  ;  ^bhud.  agnih  samidhe  manusanam  Agni 
has  appeared  to  be  kindled  of  men  (vii.  77*).  Wlien  there  is  no  passive 
sense  the  agent  is  expressed  by  the  dat, ;  e.  g.  vi  srayantam  prayai 
dev6bhyo  mahih.  may  the  great  {gates)  open  {for  tJte  gods  to  =)  that  the  gods 
mcty  enter  {i.  1426);  dabhrara  pdsyadbhya  urviya  vicdksa  usa  ajigar 
bhuvanani  vi'sva  (i.  113^)  Daicn  has  wakened  all  creatures  (for  those  loho 
nov7  see  little  to  = )  that  those  who  see  little  now  may  look  far  and  icide ; 
ahdm  riidraya  dhdnur  a  tanomi  brahmadvise  sarave  hdntava  u 
I  stretch  the  boicfor  Rudra  {for  the  arrow  to  =)  that  the  arrow  may  strike  the 
hater  of  prayer  (x.  125"). 

7.  The  infinitive  in  dhyai  is  not  infrequently  employed  elliptically 
to  express  an  intention,  the  subject  being  either  expressed  or  requir- 
ing to  be  supplied  in  the  first  or  third  person^ ;  e.  g.  prati  vam  rdtham 


^  In  Latin  the  gerundive  actually  appears  to  have  taken  the  place 
of  the  IE.  predicative  infinitive  :  see  Brugmann,  Grundriss,  4,  2, 
pp.  461  and  488. 

2  Which  in  Latin  would  be  :  laudanda  {est)  vestra  benignitas. 

^  The  inf.  is  similarly  used  in  Greek  in  the  sense  of  a  2.  pers.  impv.; 
e.  g.  -rravra  rdS'  djy(T\ai  /xrjSl  ^evSayyeXo^  (7vai  tell  all  this  and  be  not  a  false 
messenger  (Homer,  Od.) ;  flirifevai  ^xoi,  IpSjis  tell  me,  ye  Trojans  {ibid.). 


386  OUTLINES   OF   SYNTAX  [211 

jar^dhyai  Ihe  chariot  of  you  iioo  (I  purpose)  to  invoke  (vii.  67^) ;  a  va 
ausijo  huvddhyai  samsam  the  son  ofUsij  (intends)  to  pyoclaim  your  praise 
(i.  122''''). 

5.  In  B.  the  inf.  in  tavai  lias  three  uses  :  1.  with  a  final  sense  ; 
e.  g.  tam  pra  harati  yo  'sya  strtyas  tasniai  star  tavai  he  hurls  it  in  order 
to  strike  down  him  ivho  is  to  he  struck  down  by  it  (AB.).  2.  predicatively 
with  nS,  often  witli  a  passive  sense,  sometimes  impersonally  ;  e.g.  na 
v&i  yajiia  iva  m^ntavdi  it  is  not  to  he  regarded  like  a  sacrifice  (SB.) ;  na 
pura  suryasya  udetor  m^nthitav^i  one  should  not  ruh  fire  he/ore  sunrise 
(MS.);  tasmad  etenaj^asru  n^  kartavM  therefore  tears  should  not  be  shed 
by  him  (MS.).  3.  with  a  pass,  sense  after  an  ace.  governed  by  aha, 
uvaea  and  brriyat ;  e.  g.  agnim  pdristaritava  aha  he  says  that  the  fire  is 
to  be  enclosed  (MS.) ;  gopaian  samhvayitava  uvaca  he  said  that  the  cow- 
herds should  be  called  together  (SB.)  ;  tad  asvam  anetavai  bruyat  then  he 
should  order  the  horse  to  be  brought  (SB.).  Perhaps,  however,  the  ace.  here 
depends  on  the  inf.  alone  :  he  should  give  orders  to  bring  ihe  horse. 

2.    Accusative  Infinitive. 

a.  The  form  in  am  is  used  to  supplement  statements  con- 
taining a  verb  of  going  or  in  dependence  on  verbs  meaning 
he  able  (arh,  as,  sak),  wish  (vas),  or  Imoiv  (vid) ;  e.  g.  ^ipo 
emi  cikitiiso  viprcham  /  go  to  the  wise  to  inquire  (vii.  86'^) ; 
iy6tha  barhir  asadam  fhou  hast  gone  to  seat  thyself  on  the 
strmv  (iv.  9^) ;  sakema  tva  samidham  ive  would  he  able  to 
Mndle  thee  (i.  94^") ;  sa  veda  deva  anamam  devan  he,  the  god, 
hnoivs  (how)  to  guide  hither  the  gods  (iv.  8''). 

d.  In  B.  this  form  of  the  inf.  appears  only  in  dependance  on  the 
verbs  arh,  vid,  and  sak  when  they  are  combined  with  the  negative  nd,; 
e.  g.  avarundham  nd^asaknot  he  was  not  able  to  keep  hack  (MS.), 

h.  The  inf.  in  turn  in  the  RV.  expresses  the  purpose  with 
verbs  of  motion^  and  also  api^ears  in  dependence  on  the 
verbs  arh  he  able  and  ci  intend ;  e.  g.  ko  vidvamsam  upa 
gat  prastum  etat  ivho  has  gone  to  the  wise  man  to  ask  him 
this?  [i.  164*);  bhuyo  va  datum  arhasi  or  thou  canst  give 
more  (v.  79^*'). 

^  Tlie  use  of  this  inf.  is  restricted  to  dependence  on  such  verbs  in 
the  Latin  supine  in  tiim. 


211]  INFINITIVE  337 

a.  In  B.  the  use  is  similai*,  this  inf.  expressing  the  purpose 
with  verbs  of  motion,  or  in  dependence  on  the  verbs  dhr 
intend  and  (generally  accompanied  by  the  negative  na)  arh 
and  sak  he  able,  kam  desire,  dhrs  dare,  a-dr  trouble,  a-sams 
expect ;  e.  g.  hotum  eti  Jie  goes  to  sacrifice  (TS.),  drastum  a 
gachati  Jie  comes  in  order  to  see  (SB.) ;  anyad  eva  kartum 
dadhrire  'nyad  vai  kurvanti  theij  have  purposed  to  do  one 
thing,  but  do  another  (SB.) ;  katham  asakata  mad  rt6  jivitum 
hoiv  have  you  been  able  to  live  ivithout  me?  (SB.) ;  na  cakame 
hantum  he  did  not  wish  to  kill  (SB.). 

3.    Ablative- Genitive  Infinitive. 

a.  The  form  in  as  (which  is  always  compounded  with 
prepositions)  is  almost  exclusively  abl.  as  is  shown  by  its 
being  used  with  words  governing  that  case,  viz.  the  pre- 
positions rt6  without,  pura  before,  and  the  verbs  pa,  protect, 
tra  rescue,  hhi  fear ;  e.  g.  rt6  cid  abhisrisah  pura  jatrubhya 
atrdah  ivithout  binding,  before  the  cartilages  being  pierced 
(viii.  V-^) ;  tradhvam  kartad  avapadah  (ii.  29")  save  us 
from  falling  into  the  2nt  (lit. /row  the  pit,  from  falling  down). 

There  is  one  example  of  its  being  a  gen.,  as  it  is  governed 
by  the  verb  is  :  nahi  tvad  ar6  nimisas  canalise  for  without 
thee  I  am  not  able  even  to  blinJc  (ii.  28''). 

a.  In  B.  it  appears  only  as  a  gen.  governed  by  isvara;  e.  g.  saisvaro 
ydjamanasya  pasun  nirddhah  he  is  able  fo  Mm  the  cattle  of  the  sacrijtcer 

(MS.). 

b.  The  form  in  tos  is  abl.  when  it  is  governed  by  the 
prepositions  pura  before  and  a  till  or  by  verbs  of  saving  and 
preventing ;  e.  g.  pura  hantor  bhayamano  vy  ara  fearing 
he  withdreir.  before  being  struch  (iii.  30'") ;  yuyota  no  anapa- 
tyani  gantoh  save  its  from  coming  to  childlessness  (iii.  54''^). 

The  gen.  form  is  found  only  in  dependence  on  the  verb 
is  be  able  (with  the  object  by  attraction  in  the  gen.)  or  on 
the  adverb  madhya  in  the  midst  of;  e.  g.  ise  rayah  suvir- 
yasya  datoh  he  can  give  wealth  and  heroic  offspring  (vii.  4") ; 


1819 


338  OUTLINES   OF   SYNTAX  [211 

ma  no  madhya  ririsata^ayur  gantoh.  injure  us  not  {in  the 
midst  of  =  )  before  our  reaching  old  age  (i.  89^). 

a.  In  B.  the  aljl.  inf.  is  found  with  prepositional  words  only.  It 
usually  occurs  with  a  till  and  pura  before,  both  the  subject  and  the 
object  being  in  the  gen.  The  object  may,  however,  by  attraction  he 
in  the  abl.,  and  a  predicate  is  in  the  abl.  ;  e.  g.  a  suryasya  lidetoh 
(MS.)  iill  the  sun's  rising  =  till  the  sun  rises  ;  a  tisrnam  dogdhoh  (SB.) 
till  the  milking  of  three  (cows)  =  till  three  (cows)  are  milked  ;  a  midhyad 
bhdvitoh.  till  becoming  pure  ;  pura  siiryasya^udetoh  before  the  suns  rising 
CMS.)  =  before  the  sun  rises;  pura  vagbhyah  sampravaditoh  before  the 
voices'  uttering  (PB.)=  before  the  roices  are  uttered.  The  abl.  form  is  also 
sometimes  used  with  the  prepositional  adverbs  purastad  and  arvaci- 
nam  before  ;  e.  g.  purastad  dhotoh.  before  sacrificing  (MS.) ;  arvacinam 
jd.nitoh  before  being  horn  (MS.). 

The  gen.  form  occurs  only  in  dependence  on  isvar^  able,  the  object 
being  in  the  ace.  (sometimes  by  attraction  in  the  gen.),  and  the  predi- 
cate in  the  nom.  ;  e.g.  sd.  isvard,  artim  artoh  he  can  fall  into  misfortune 
(TS.) ;  ta  isvara  ydjamanam  himsitoh  these  tivo  can  injure  the  sacrificer 
(MS.).  Occasionally  isvard,  is  omitted  ;  e.  g.  t&to  diksitah  pamano 
bhdvitoh  hence  the  initiated  man  (can)  become  scabby  (^B,). 

4.    Locative  Infinitive. 

The  only  loc.  forms  to  which  a  genuine  inf.  use  (cp.  167,  4) 
can  be  attributed  are  the  few  in  sani.  These  supplement  j 
the  general  statement  of  the  sentence  or  depend  on  a 
particular  word  in  it,  and  (like  the  form  in  dhyai)  express 
an  intention  or  exhortation  (with  the  ellipse  of  a  A^erb  in 
the  1.,  2.,  or  3.  pers.) ;  e.  g.  vi  nah  pathas  cltana  yastave, 
asmabhyam  visva  asas  tarisani  do  ye  oj^en  up  for  us  the 
paths  to  sacrifice,  {for  us  to  =)  that  tve  may  conquer  all  regions 
(iv.  37") ;  nayistha  u  no  uesani,  parsistha  ti  nah  parsany 
ati  dvisah.  the  best  guides  to  guide  us,  the  best  leaders  to  lead 
us  through  our  foes  (x.  126'^) ;  tad  va  ukthasya  barhana^ 
indraya^upastrnisani  this  song  of  praise  (I  will)  spread  out 
uith  power  for  your  In  Ira  (vi.  44*^] ;  priyam  vo  atithim 
grnisani  (do  ye)  extol  your  dear  guest  (vi.  15''j ;  ijanam 
bhumir  abhi  prabhtisani  {let)  Earth  assist  the  sacrificer 
(x.  132'). 


•21-2]  TENSES  AND   MOODS  839 


TENSES    AND    MOODS. 

212.  Two  or  more  roots  of  cognate  meaning  sometimes 
supplement  each  other  in  such  a  way  as  to  be  used  for 
different  tenses  of  what  is  practically  one  verb.     Such  are : 

1.  as  and  bhti  he  :  the  pres.,  impf ,  and  perf.  are  formed  by 
as  ;  the  fut.  and  aor,  by  bhu  alone.  In  its  proper  sense 
bhu  means  lo  hccome  (originally  to  gron-),  but  unless  oi^posed 
to  as  he,  it  has  the  same  sense  as  the  latter,  the  pres.  and 
perf.  of  both  being  used  promiscuously.  The  contrast 
appears  clearly  when  the  pres.  is  opposed  to  the  aor. ;  e.  g. 
yamo  va  idam  abhud  yad  vayam  smah  Yama  has  become 
that  which  we  are  (TS.).  It  also  appears  in  the  impf. :  ya 
vipriisa  asarns  tah  sarkara  abhavan  what  were  S])arks 
hrcame  gravel  (MS.). 

2.  dhav  and  sr  run  :  in  the  RV.  occur  the  plup.  adadhavat 
and  the  pres.  sisarti ;  in  B.  the  pres.  dhavati,  the  impf. 
asarat,  and  the  perf.  sasara. 

3.  pas  and  drs  see :  the  former  appears  in  the  pres.  only, 
the  latter  in  the  aor.,  fut.,  and  perf.  only  ;  khya  see  is  used 
in  the  same  tenses  as  drs,  but  as  opposed  to  the  latter  means 
disceni. 

4.  bru  and  vac  speaJc :  the  former  is  used  in  the  pres. 
stem  only  ;  the  latter  in  the  aor.,  fut.,  perf.  (V.  has  also  the 
pres.  vivakti). 

5.  han  and  vadh  slaij:  the  former  has  the  pres.,  impf., 
fut.,  perf.  only,  the  latter  the  aor.  only. 

a.  Ill  B.  a  few  additional  pairs  of  roots  supplement  each  other  to 
some  extent.  Such  are  ad  and  ghas  ea(;  aj  and  vi  drive;  i  and  ga 
(aor.)  go  ;  pra-yam  and  pr a- da,  present ;  sad  and  si  fall. 

Present. 

A.  In  V.  a  number  of  verbs  form  two  or  more  present 
stems,  in  which,  however,  no  differences  of  meaning  are 
traceable.     In  B.  this  multiplicity  is  for  the  most  part  lost. 

z2 


340  OUTLINES   OF   SYNTAX  [212 

The  only  type  here  showing  any  develoj^ment  is  that  in  ya. 
which  tends  to  have  an  intransitive  sense.  Such  j)resent 
stems  are  formed  in  B.  from  more  than  a  dozen  roots 
that  do  not  form  it  in  the  EV.  ;  e.  g.  tapyati  f/roics  hot 
(RV.  tapati). 

1.  As  in  other  languages,  the  present  is  used  to  indicate 
an  action  that  is  taking  place  when  the  speaker  makes  his 
statement. 

2.  In  the  RV.  the  simple  pres.  is  sometimes  employed  of 
past  actions  in  narration  to  add  a  new  statement  in  a  vivid 
mannei- ;  e.  g.  purutra  vrtro  asayad  vyastah :  amuya 
sayanam  ati  yantl^apah  Vrtra  lay  scattered  in  many  places  : 
over  Itlm  as  he  thus  lies  the  waters  flow  (i.  32'^). 

This  use  does  not  seem  to  occur  in  B. 

a.  pura  formerly  is  used  with  the  pres.  to  indicate  an 
action  which  has  extended  through  the  past  down  to  the 
present ;  e,  g.  kva  tani  nau  sakhya  babhuvuh,  sacavahe 
yad  avrkam  pura  cit  ichere  has  that  friendshij)  of  ns  two 
gone,  inasmuch  as  we  have  hithciio  associated  inoffensively 
(vii.  88'^) ;  sa  ha^agnir  uvaca^atha  yan  mam  pura  pra- 
thamam  yajatha  kva^aham  bhavani^iti  .so  Agni  said: 
'now  that  you  have  hitherto  honoured  me  at  the  sacrifice  as  the 
first  where  shall  I  he?  (SB.). 

a.  In  B.  pvira  is  also  iised  without  reference  to  the  actual  present 
from  the  speaker's  point  of  view,  to  express  a  previous  stage  in  typical 
conditions  ;  e.  g.  ahota  va  esd  pura  bhavati  yada^evS^^enam  pravr- 
nit6  'tha  hota  he  is  frevionsly  a  non-Hoir  ;  as  soon  as  he  chooses  him,  then 
he  is  a  Hotr  {SB.)  ;  dnaddhaj^^iva  va  asya^atah  pura  janam  bhavati 
previously  his  origin  is  as  if  were  uncertain  (SB.). 

I),  sma  pura  with  the  pres.  ind.  expresses  that  something 
used  to  happen  in  the  past ;  e.  g.  samhotram  sma  pura 
nari  samanaip.  va^ava  gachati  formerly  the  ivoman  used  to 
go  down  to  the  common  sacrifice  or  the  assembly  (x.  86^"). 

a.  Tlie  same  usage  is  common  in  B.  with  ha  sma  pura  ;  e.  g.  n£  ha 
snaa  vai  pura^_^agnir  dparasuvrknam  dahati  forinerhj  Agni  iised  not  to 
hum  iphat  ivas  not  cut  off  icilh  the  axe  (TS.}.     Here,  however,  the  pura  ts 


212-213]  PRESENT  341 

much  more  usually  umitted,  ha  sma  alone  expressing  the  same  sense, 
especially  often  with  the  pres.  perf.  aha  ;  e.g.  etfid  dha  sma  va  aha 
naradfih  (MS.)  loith  regard  to  this  Ndrada  used  to  saij.  (The  AB.  uses  the 
perf.  and  the  impf.  with  ha  sma  in  the  same  sense.)  The  particles  ha 
sma,  which  originally  only  accompanied  it,  have  thus  acquired,  when 
used  alone,  the  sense  which  is  inherent  in  pura  only. 

c.  The  pres.  ind.  is  also  sometimes  used  for  the  fut.  or 
the  subj.  ;  e.  g.  aham  api  hanmi^iti  ha^uvaca  he  said : 
I  too  ivill  ski//  lihn  (SB.);  indras  ea  rusamas  ca^amsam 
prasyetam  :  yataro  nau  purvo  bhumim  paryeti  sa  jay- 
ati^iti  Indra  and  liukima  proposed  a  ivager :  whichever  of  us 
shall  go  round  the  earth  first  shall  ivin  (PB.). 


Past  Tenses. 

213.  Each  of  the  past  tenses  (except  the  pluperfect)  has 
a  distinctive  meaning  of  its  own,  though  occasional  examples 
of  aor.  and  perf.  forms  occur  that  are  almost  indistinguish- 
able in  sense  from  the  impf. 

A.  The  perfect  characteristically  expresses  the  condition 
attained  by  the  sul^ject  as  the  result  of  a  preceding  action. 
If  that  action  (often  a  repeated  or  continuous  one)  is  con- 
tinued into  the  present  so  as  to  include  the  latter,  it  may  be 
translated  by  the  present ;  if  it  is  regarded  as  concluded 
before  the  present,  by  the  present  perfect.  It  can  express 
both  these  senses  when  accompanied  by  the  adverbs  pura 
formerly  and  nunam  now ;  e.  g.  pura  nunam  ca  stutaya 
rsinam  pasprdhre  tlie  praises  of  the  seers  have  vied  together 
in  past  times  and  (do  so)  now  (vi.  34^) ;  sasvad  dhi  va  utibhir 
vayam  pura  nunam  bubhujmahe  we  have  constantly  enjoyed 
your  aids  and  (do  so)  now  (viii.  67'®) ;  the  same  sense  appears 
with  the  adverb  satra  always ;  e.  g.  tiibhyam  brahmani 
gira  indra  tubhyam  satra  dadhire :  jusasva  to  thee 
prayers,  0  Indra,  to  thee  songs  have  always  been  offered  (and 
still  are):  accept  them  kindly  (iii.  51").  But  even  without 
a  particle  this  double  sense  is  not  infrequently  apparent : 


342  OUTLINES   OF   SYNTAX  [213 

na  soma  indram  asuto  mamada  (vii.  26')  tinpressed  Soma 
has  not  (in  the  past)  intoxicated  Indra  (and  does  not  now) ; 
na  bhoja  mamrur  na  nyartham  iyur :  na  risyanti  na 
vyathante  ha  bhojah  the  liberal  have  not  died  (and  die  not), 
they  have  not  fallen  into  calamity  (and  do  not  now) :  the  liberal 
are  not  injured  and  waver  not  (x.  107*) ;  indra  .  .  .  ubhe  a 
paprau  rodasi  mahitva  Indra  has  with  his  greatness  filed 
(and  still  fills)  the  two  worlds  (iii.  54^'^). 

a.  Thus  a  number  of  perfects  (since  their  action  includes 
the  present)  can  be  translated  by  the  present,  as  is  indicated 
by  their  often  occurring  by  the  side  of  actual  present  forms. 
Such  perfects  are  formed  from  verbs  meaning  to  know ; 
he  pleased,  sad,  or  afraid ;  stand,  sit,  lie;  rest  upon,  hold  fast; 
have,  possess  ;  encompass  ;  siirpass  ;  prosper  ;  hecome ;  show 
oneself;  e.  g.  kva^idanim  suryali :  kas  ciketa  irhere  is  now 
the  sun  :  who  knows  ?  (i.  35") ;  yan  na  indro  jnjiise  yac  ca 
vasti  what  Indra  likes  from  tis  and  what  he  desires  (iv.  22') ; 
ka  isate,  tujyate,  ko  bibhaya  who  flees  (and)  speeds,  icho  is 
afraid  ?  (i.  84^') ;  na  methete  na  tasthatuh  they  (night  and 
morning)  clash  not  and  stand  not  still  (i.  113''') ;  vane-vane 
sisriye  takvavir  iva  on  every  tree  he  sits  liJce  a  hird  (x.  Ol-^) ; 
yatha^iyam  prthivi  mahi  dadhara^iman  vanaspatin  eva 
dadhara  te  manah  as  this  great  earth  holds  these  trees,  so  he 
holds  thy  spirit  (x.  60') ;  na  te  purve  na^aparaso  na  viryam 
nutanah  kas  cana^apa  not  earlier  men,  not  future  men,  no 
man  of  the  present  {has  attained  =)  equals  thy  heroism  (v.  42'^') ; 
pra  hi  ririksa  ojasa  divo  antebhyas  pari,  na  tva  vivyaca 
raja  indra  parthivam  tJtoit  extendest  beyond  the  ends  of 
hexven  with  thy  might,  the  terrestrial  space  does  not  contain  thee 
(viii.  SS'') ;  indrena  susuve  nrbhir  yds  te  sunoti  through 
Indra  he  who  presses  (Soma)  for  thee  invspers  in  men  (vii.  32"^) ; 
sed  u  raja  ksayati  carsaninam,  aran  na  nemih  pari  ta 
babhuva  he  rules  as  king  over  men,  he  encompasses  the  worlds 
(ta)  as  the  felly  the  spolics  (i.  32'-5) ;  bhadra  dadrksa  urviya 
vi   bhasi,  ut  te  soeir   bhanavo  dyam  apaptan  brilliant 


213]  PERFECT  343 

tilou  appearest,  thou  shlnest  afar,  thy  light,  tliy  beams,  have  shot 
up  to  heaven  (vi.  64^). 

6.  Other  perfects,  which  sum  up  past  action  but  exclude 
the  present,  may  be  transhxted  by  the  present  peifect ;  e.  g. 
yat  sim  agas  cakrma  tat  sii  mrlatu  whatever  sin  we  have 
t'ommittecl,  let  him  forgive  that  (i.  179"');  ya  vrtraha  paravati 
Sana  nava  ca  cueyuv^,  ta  samsatsu  pra  vocata  wliat  old 
and  new  deeds  the  Vrtra-slager  has  set  going  in  the  distance, 
those  proclaim  in  the  assemblies  (viii.  45^'') ;  uvasa^usa  uchac 
ca  mi  Dawn  has  flushed  (in  the  pasi)  and  she  shall  flush  now 
(i.  48"^) ;  kim  aga  asa  varuna  jy^stham,  yat  stotaram 
jighamsasi  sakhayam  a-hat  has  that  chief  sin  been  (in  my 
past  life)  that  thou  desirest  to  slay  the  praiser,  thy  friend'^ 
(vii.  86^) ;  iyiis  te  ye  plirvataram  apasyan  vyuchantim 
iisasam  martyasah ;  6  [=8,  uj  te  yanti  ye  aparisu  pasyan 
tliose  mortals  have  gone  who  saw  flushing  the  earlier  dawn ; 
those  are  coming  tvho  shall  see  her  in  the  future  (i.  113^'). 

c.  The  perf.  often  expresses  a  single  action  that  has  been 
completed  in  the  recent  past,  when  it  can  be  translated  by 
the  pres.  perf.  ;  e.g.  a  no  yatam  divas  pari :  putrah 
kanvasya  vam  iha  susava  somyam  madhu  come  to  us  from 
heaven:  the  son  of  Kaava  has  here  pressed  for  you  the  Soma 
mead  (viii.  8"^).  This  use  of  the  perf.  comes  very  near  that 
of  the  aor.  The  distinction  seems  to  be  this :  in  the  above 
passage  the  perfect  means  come  because  the  Soma  has  been 
pressed,  i.  e.  is  ready  for  you ;  the  aor.  would  mean  come 
because  of  the  fact  that  the  Soma  has  just  been  pressed  for  you. 

d.  The  perf.  is  not  infrequently  used  of  a  single  action  izi 
the  remoter  past,  when  it  cannot  be  translated  by  the  perf. 
pres.  It  occurs  thus  beside  the  impf.  of  narration,  when 
the  story  is  interrupted  by  a  reflexion  which  often  expresses 
the  result  of  the  action  previously  related.  Thus  in  the 
story  of  the  Vitra  fight  the  poet  says  :  ajayo  ga  ajayah 
sura  somam ;  avasrjah.  sartave  sapta  sindhun  thou  didst 
win  the  kine,  thou  didst  win  the  Soma,  0  hero,  thou  didst  let 


844  OUTLINES   OF  SYNTAX  [213 

loose  the  seven  streams  to  flow  (i.  32'^^);- he  then  adds  indras 
ca  yad.  yuyudhate  ahis  ca^uta^aparibhyo  maghava  vi 
jigye  ivhen  Indra  and  the  serpent  fought,  the  bounteous  god 
conquered  (—remained  conqueror) /or  the  future.  This  use 
of  the  perf.  is  hardly  distinguishable  from  the  impf. 

n.  la  B.  the  jjerf.  incl.  appears  in  three  different  uses  : 

1.  in  a  present  sense  based  on  the  pres.  perf.,  chiefly  in  forms  that 
have  a  strengthened  reduplicative  vowel  and  tlius  seem  to  have  an 
intensive  meaning.  It  is  the  jires.  perf.  tliat  includes  the  present, 
expressing  that  an  action  takes  place  in  the  jiresent  as  a  result  of  its 
repetition  in  the  past  ;  e.  g.  dadhara  (Jie  has  constantly  held  and  iioio) 
holds ;  e.  g.  y^t  sayam  juhoti  ratryai  tena  dadhara  if  he  offers  in  the 
evening,  he  thereby  Itolds  {A(jni)  for  the  night  (MS.).  Other  perfects  of  this 
kind  are:  didaya  shines;  upa  dodrava  rashes  at;  yoyava  wards  off'; 
lelaya  quivers  ;  bibhaya  (beside  bibhaya)  fea7-s  (while  the  periphrastic 
bibhayam  cakara  has  always  a  preterite  sense).  Besides  these  verbs 
veda  knows  and  aha  says  always  have  a  jjresent  sense. 

Several  other  perfects  with  ordinary  reduplication  often  have  the 
Ijresent  sense:  anase  (has  ohfained  =)  has  (MS.,  TS.) ;  pariyaya  (/ms 
acquired  =)  possesses  (TS.);  babhuva  {has  become  =)  is  (MS.);  vivya3a 
{has  encompassed  =)  contains;  dadrsi  {has  been  seen  =)  appears  (Avhile 
dadarsa  always  has  a  past  sense);  also  the  perfect  of  grab  and  pra-ap  : 
ye  hi  pasavo  loma  jagrhiis  te  medham  prapuh  the  cattle  which  have  hair 
have  also  fat  (MS.). 

2.  in  a  preterite  sense,  expressing  that  an  action  once  occui-red  in 
the  past  (but  not  in  the  narrative  sense  of  the  impf.).  This  use  most 
often  appears  in  the  form  uvaca,  which  may  be  translated  by  once 
said  or  has  said ;  e.  g.  etena  va  upakeru  raradha  :  rdhnoti  y^  et^na 
yajate  by  this  sacrifice  Upakeru  once  prospered  ;  he  loho  sacrifices  ivith  it 
prospers  (MS.).  It  often  occurs  in  the  AB.  at  the  conclusion  of  a  story 
related  in  the  impf.,  in  the  phrase  tad  etad  rsih  pasyann  abhyanu- 
vaca  seeing  this  a  seer  has  uttered  icith  reference  to  it  (the  following  verse). 
A  somewhat  different  connexion  with  the  narrative  impf.  ap}3ears  in 
the  following  example  :  etam  ha  vaiyajnasenas  citim  vidam  cakara  : 
tfi.ya  vdi  sa  pasiin  avarunddha  this  method  of  piling  Yajnasena  once  in- 
tented  :  by  means  of  it  he  acquired  cattle  (TS.).  This  perfect  is  found  con- 
trasting  what  is  past  with  the  present  and  future  in  the  following 
successive  sentences  :  yad  va  asyam  kim  carcanti  y^d  anrciir  ;  yad 
evd  kim  ca  vaca^anrcur  ydd  dto  'dhi^_^arcitarah  lohatever  prayers  they 
offer  on  it  (the  earth)  or  have  offered  :  ivhatever  prayers  they  have  offered  ivith 
the  voice  or  will  offer  in  future  (TS.). 

3.  in  an  historical  sense,  equivalent  to  that  of  the  impf.  in  narrative, 


213]  PEKFECT.     IMPERFECT.     AORIST  345 

in  certain  jmrts  of  the  AB.  (vi-viii)  and  the  SB.  (i-v ;  xi,  xii,  xiv), 
while  the  impf.  is  used  elsewhere  in  B.  ^MS.,  TS.,  K.,TB.,  PB.,  AB.  i-v  ; 
SB.  \i-x,  xiii;.  Thus  iii  the  former  nvhoa,  said  and  devas  ca^dsuras 
ca  pasprdhire  ihe  gods  and  theAsuras  icere  in  conflict,  in  the  latter  abravit 
and  aspardhanta  would  be  used.  There  are,  of  course,  exceptions  in 
both  groups. 

B.  The  imperfect  is  the  past  tense  of  narration,  never 
having  any  relation  to  the  present  as  the  perf.  and  the  aor. 
have ;  e.  g.  ahann  ahim  .  .  .  pra  vaksana  abhinat  parva- 
tanam  Jie  sleiv  the  serpent;  lie  pierced  the  hellies  of  the  mountains 
(i.  32\) ;  na  vai  tvam  tad  akaror  yad  aham  abravam  you 
did  not  do  luhat  I  said  (SB.).  The  impf.  has  also  to  do  duty 
for  the  pluperfect,  as  in  the  relative  clause  of  the  preceding 
example,  which  is  equivalent  to  what  I  had  told  you, 

C.  The  aorist  iud.  expresses  that  an  action  has  occurred 
in  the  past  with  reference  to  the  present.  It  neither 
describes  nor  indicates  duration,  but  simply  states  a  fact. 
It  may  nearly  always  be  translated  by  the  English  present 
perfect. 

The  aor.  usually  expresses  the  immediate  past ;  e.  g.  prati 
divo  adarsi  duhita  the  daughter  of  heaven  has  appeared 
(iv.  52') ;  yasmad  du§vapnyad  abhaisma^^^apa  tad  uchatvi 
let  her  (Dawn)  drive  aivay  tvith  her  light  the  evil  dream  that  ive 
have  feared  (viii.  47^^). 

a.  In  B.  three  uses  of  the  aor.  ind.  may  be  distinguished :  1.  it 
expresses  what  has  occurred  in  the  speaker's  experience,  very 
commonly  in  tlie  statement  made  by  the  witness  of  an  action  ;  e.  g. 
tato  ha  gandharvah  sd.m  iidire  :  jyok  va  iydm  urvasi  manusyesv 
avatsit  tlten  the  Gandharvas  spoke  together :  this  Urvasi  has  dwelt  long  among 
men  {SB.).  As  compared  with  the  impf.  it  never  narrates  ;  e.g.  yajno 
vai  devebhya  ud  akramat;  te  deva  abruvan :  yajno  vai  na  ud 
akramit  the  sacrifice  went  away  from  the  gods  ;  the  gods  then  said  :  the  sacri- 
fice has  gone  axvaij  from  us  (AB.) ;  tam  yd.d  dprchant  sabravid:  adya^ 
am^ta^_^lti  lohen  they  askt'd  her,  she  said  :  he  has  died  to-day  (MS.) ;  t^m 
aprchan  :  kasmai  tvam  ahausir  iti  they  asked  him :  to  tohom  have  you 
sacrificed?  (MS.);  t^m  deva  abruvan:  mahan  va  ayam  abhiid  yo 
vrtrdm  dvadhid  iti  the  gods  said  of  him  :  he  has  shotvu.  himself  great  who  has 
slain  Vrtra  (TS.)  ;  t6  ha^ucur :  agndye  tistha^iti  tatas  tasthav,  agnaye 
va  asthad  iti  tam  agnav  a,juha,vnh  they  said :  stand  still  for  Agni ;  then 


346  OUTLINES   OF   SYNTAX  [•213-214 

it  stood  still;  thinking  it  has  stood  still  for  Agni,  iheij  sacrificed  it  in  Agni 

(SB.). 

2.  it  is  employed  by  the  author  with  regard  to  what  from  his  own 
point  of  view  has  either  jvist  happened  or  has  occurred  in  the  more 
remote  past ;  e.  g.  sa  b^ndhur  sunasiryasya  y^m  purvam  avocama 
this  is  the  import  of  the  Sund-strya  ohlalion  which  -we  have  eTplained  above 
(SB,) ;  puro  va  etan  deva  akrata  yat  purolasams  tat  purolasanam 
purolasatvam  because  the  gods  have  made  these  cakes  their  castles,  the  cakes 
are  so  called  (AB.).  The  adverb  pura  is  not  infrequently  used  witli 
these  aorists ;  e.  g.  na  va  etasya  brahmanah  pu^a^_^annam  aksau 
Brahmins  have  never  hitherto  eaten  his  food  (TS.). 

3.  it  expresses  what  results  from  a  ritual  act  or  is  antecedent  to  it ; 
e.  g.  putrasya  nama  grhnati  :  prajani  eva^anu  s^m  atanit  he  gives  his 
son  a  name  :  he  has  thus  extended  his  race  (MS.);  et^dvai  trtiyani  yajnam 
apad  y^c  chandamsi^apnoti  thereby  he  has  obtained  the  third  sacrifice  when 
he  obtains  the  metres  (TS.) ;  yad  dhf^asya^amedhyam  abhiit  tad  dhi^_^ 
asya^et^d  avadhiinoti  wliat  has  been  impure  in  it,  that  in  it  he  shakes  off  in 
this  way  (SB.). 

D.  The  pluperfect,  as  an  augmented  perfect,  is  equivalent 
to  the  corresponding  Greek  tense  in  form  only.  It  cannot 
be  distinguished  in  syntactical  use  from  the  impf.  in  some 
examples  and  from  the  aor.  in  others;  e.g.  atra  samudra 
a  gulham  a  suryam  ajabhartana  then  ye  hroiight  the  sun 
hUIden  in  the  sea  (x.  72') ;  ud  u  sya  devah  savita  yayama 
hiranyayim  amatim  yam  asisret  that  god  Savitr  now  has 
raised  up  the  golden  sheen  which  he  has  sj^read  out  (vii.  38'). 

Future. 

214.  A.  1.  The  simple  future  is  in  comparatively  rare 
use  in  V.,  being  formed  from  only  fifteen  roots  in  the  RV. 
and  from  rather  more  than  twenty  others  in  the  AV.  This 
limited  employment  is  accounted  for  by  its  sense  being 
partly  expressed  by  the  subjunctive  and  to  some  extent  by 
the  present.  It  means  that,  according  to  the  opinion, 
expectation,  intention,  hope  or  fear  of  the  speaker,  an  action 
is  to  take  place  in  the  near  or  the  remote  future.  The 
sphere  of  the  future  includes  that  of  the  will,  the  specific 
meaning  of  the  subjunctive,  but  the  stress  is  here  laid  on 


214]  FUTURE  347 

tlie  futurity  rather  than  the  purpose  ;  e.  g.  atha^atah  pasoi' 
vibhaktis :  tasya  vibhagam  vaksyamah  next  (comes)  the 
division  of  the  (sacrificial)  animal :  (now)  we  ivill  {shall)  state 
its  division  (AB.). 

Examples  from  the  EV.  are  :  stavisyami  tvam  ahSm  I  shall  praise 
iJiee  (i.  44"j  ;  kfm  svid  vaksyami  kim  ii  nu  manisye  ivhat  2>ray  shall 
I  say,  ivhat  shall  I  now  think  ?  (vi.  9*') ;  yady  eva  karisydtha  sakd,m 
devair  yajiiiyaso  bhavisyatha  if  ye  icill  do  so,  you  will  be  partakers  of  the 
sacrifice  ivith  the  gods  (i.  1G1-)  ;  na  tvavara  indra  kas  cana  na  jato  na 
janisyate  no  o?ie  equal  to  thee,  0  Indra,  has  been  born  or  will  be  born. 

2.  Ill  B.  tlie  simple  future  is  frequently  used  after  verbs  of  speaking, 
knowing,  thinking,  hoping,  fearing,  wliicli  are  sometimes  also  to  be 
supplied;  e.g.  so  'bravid  :  idd,m  mdyi  viryam,  tat  te  prfi  dasyanii,^^ 
iti  he  said:  hej-e  is  heroism  in  me,  that  I  will  give  thee  i^TS.);  te  ha^ucuh 
kena  rajiia,  kena^_,dnikena  yotsyama  iti  they  said  :  with  ichom  as  king, 
with  whom  as  leader  sliall  tee  fight  ?  (SB.) ;  tatra  vidyad  :  varsisyati^iti 
in  regard  to  that  he  should  know :  it  loill  rain  (SB.)  ;  indro  ha  va  iksam 
cakre  :  mahad  va  ito  'bhvam  janisyate  Indra  reflected :  a  great  abuse 
will  arise  from  this  (SB.)  ;  sarva  devata  asamsanta  :  mam  abhi  prati 
patsyatii^iti  all  the  gods  hoped  :  lie  will  begin  luith  me  (AB.) ;  yadi  bibhiyad 
dusearma  bhavisyami^iti  if  he  should  fear,  'I  shall  suffer  from  skin  disease' 
(TS.;;  asura  va  istaka  acinvata  :  divam  a  roksyama  iti  the  Asuras 
built  up  the  bricks  (thinking)  :  ice  shall  scale  heaven  (MS.). 

a.  After  an  impv.,  the  fut.  is  often  used  with  dtha;  e.g.  patim  nu 
me  piinar  yuvanam  kurutam :  atha  vam  vaksyami  (SB.)  inake  my 
husband  young  again  :  then  I  shcdl  tell  you  {two). 

/3.  After  the  impv.  of  a-i  or  pra-i  the  1.  pers.  fut.  is  equivalent  to 
an  exhortation  ;  e.  g.  pra^ita,  tad  esyamah.  come,  ive  ivill  go  there  (SB.). 

7.  With  the  negative  nd,  the  2.  and  even  the  3.  pers.  may  have  the 
value  of  a  j^rohibition  ;  e.  g.  devan  raksamsi  .  .  ajighamsan  :  na  yaks- 
yadhva  iti  the  Eaksases  wished  to  slay  tlie  gods  (saying) :  you  shall  not  sacri- 
fice (SB.);  tan  visve  deva  anonudyanta  neha  pasyanti  neha^_,iti  all 
the  gods  drove  them  back  (saying)  :  tliey  shcdl  not  drink  here,  not  here 
(AB.). 

B.  The  periphrastic  future  though  not  occurring  in  V.,  is  frequent 
in  B.  It  expresses  that  something  will  take  place  at  a  definite  point 
of  time  in  tlic  future.  It  is  therefore  often  accompanied  by  such 
words  as  pratar  early  in  the  morning,  svas  to-morroiv  (but  never  by  adya 
to-day).  The  point  of  time,  however,  need  not  he  expressed  by  an 
adverb  ;  it  may  be  defined  by  a  clause.  Examples  are :  samvatsara- 
tamim  ratrim  a  gachatat,  tan  ma  ekam  ratrim  ante  sayitase,  jata  u 
te  'y^ip  tdrhi  putro  bhavita  come  for  (lie  night  of  this  day  year,  then  you 


348  OUTLINES   OF   SYNTAX  [214-215 

wUl  lie  beside  me  for  one  night,  then  too  this  son  of  thine  wiU  be  born  (SB.)  ; 
y^di  pura  samsthanad  diryeta^adya  varsisyati^_^iti  bruyad  ;  y^di 
s^msthite  svo  vrasta^iti  bruyat  if  it  (the  vessel)  should  be  broken  before 
tlie  completion  (of  the  sacrifice)  he  shoidd  say :  it  will  rain  to-day  ;  if  it  has 
been  completed,  he  should  saij  :  it  will  rain  to-morrow  (MS.)  ;  yarhi  vava  vo 
maya^artho  bhavita,  tarhy  eva  vo  'ham  punar  agantasmi  ichen  you  loill 
have  need  of  me,  then  (on  that  particular  occasion)  I  will  come  back  to  yoa 

(AB.). 

a.  Sometimes  this  form  is  used  to  express  not  that  an  action  will 
take  place  at  a  definite  time,  but  that  it  will  take  place  with  certainty  ; 
e.g.  sa^evfi^iyam  adya^ipi  pratistha,  sa^u  eva^api^ato  'dhi  bhavita 
this  is  the  found-ado  n  to-day,  and  it  will  also  (certainly)  be  so  in  future  (SB.^. 

A.    Imperative. 

215.  The  only  pure  impv.  forms  are  those  of  the  2.  3.  sing, 
and  3.  pL,  represented  by  bhava  and  bhavatat,  bhavasva ; 
bhavatu ;  bhavantu,  bhavantam.  The  forms  later  regarded 
as  imperatives  of  the  l.pers.,  bhavani,  bhavava,  bhavama 
are  subjunctives  (cp.  131):  while  the  2.  3,  du.  and  2.  pi. 
bhavatam,  bhavatam,  bhavetham,  bhavetam ;  bhavata, 
bhavadhvaia,  are  injunctives  (cp.  122  a  a). 

a.  The  impv.  does  not  express  commands  only,  but  also 
a  desire  in  the  widest  sense,  such  as  a  wish,  a  request, 
advice,  a  direction  ;  e.  g.  devam  iha^a  vaha  bring  lather  the 
gods  (i.  14'-) ;  ahelamano  bodhi  he  not  angrg  (i.  24") ; 
imani^asya  sirsani  chinddhi  cut  off  these  heads  of  his  (MS.) ; 
vrkse  navam  prati  badhnisva  tie  the  ship  to  the  tree  (SB.) ; 
pra  vam  asnotu  sustutih.  may  the  hymn  of  praise  reach  you 
tivo  (i.  17^) ;  hanta  na  eko  vettu  come,  let  one  of  us  find 
out  (SB.). 

h.  The  sphere  of  the  ordinary  impv.  is  the  present ;  it 
may,  however,  still  be  used  for  the  later  of  two  opposed 
actions ;  e.  g.  varam  vrnisva^atha  me  punar  dehi  choose 
a  boon  and  then  give  it  me  bade  (TS.).  The  form  in  tad, 
however,  has  a  tendency  in  V.  to  express  the  more  remote 
future,  and  in  B.  does  so  distinctly ;  e.  g.  iha^eva  ma 
tisthantam  abhyehi^iti  bruhi,  tarn  tii  na  agatam  pratipra 


215]  IMPERATIVE  349 

brutat  tell  her :  come  io  me  as  I  stand  here  ;  when  she  has 

come,  you  shall  (then)  tell  it  us  (SB.).     As  this  form  is  only 

active,  the  subj.  takes  its  place  in  middle  verbs  ;  thus  tarn 

vrnisva  =  do  thou  choose  H  (now)  as  opposed  to  tarn  vrnasai 

choose  it  then  (SB.). 

n,  Tlie  genuine  impv.  seems  never  to  be  found  in  negative  sen- 
tences ;  thus  it  never  appears  in  V.  witli  the  prohibitive  particle  ma 

which  is  used  with  injunctive  forms  only,  and  in  B.  almost  exclu- 
sively with  the  aor.  in.j.).  It  is  employed  in  positive  principal  clauses 
only ;  e.  g.  v{  no  dhehi  ydtha  jivama  so  dispose  us  that  ice  may  live  (SB.). 
A  subordinate  clause  with  ind,,  subj.,  or  (very  rarely)  opt.  may  pre- 
cede or  follow ;  e.  g.  y£s  tvam  dutam  saparySti,  tfisya  sma  pravita 
bhava  be  the  promoter  of  him  ivlio  adores  thee  as  a  messenger  (i.  12^);  sam 
vidusa  naya  yo  .  .  anusasati  hring  us  together  with  one  who  knows,  who 
may  give  us  directions  (vi.  .54^)  ;  id£m  me  haryata  v^co  y^sya  tSrema 
tdrasa  sat&m  liimah  gladly  accept  this  word  of  mine  by  the  force  of  ichich  we 
n-otdd  pass  a  hundred  nmiters  (v.  54^^).  In  such  periods  the  form  with 
tad  would  regularly  be  used  in  B. 

0.  The  RV.  has  a  niimber  of  2.  sing,  forms  made  with  si  added 
directly  to  the  root,  which  are  clearly  used  imperatively,  as  is  indicated 
by  their  being  generally  accompanied  by  imperatives  (sometimes  by 
subjunctives  and  imperatives) ;  e.g.  a  dev^bhir  yahi  ydksi  ca  come 
with  the  gods  and  sacrifice  (i.  14').     These  forms  are  confined  to  the  RV. 

and  passages  borrowed  from  it)  except  satsi  (AV.  vi.  110^);  and  they 
are  restricted  to  positive  principal  sentences. 

B.    Injunctive. 

Formally  this  mood  corresponds  to  an  unaugmented  past 
tense  (including  the  2.  3.  du.  and  2.  pi.  as  represented  by 
act,  bhavatam,  bhavatam,  bhavata :  mid.  bhavetham, 
bhavetam,  bhavadhvam,  which  later  came  to  be  regarded 
as  imperatives).  Its  use  constitutes  one  of  the  chief 
difficulties  of  Vedic  grammar  and  interpretation,  because  it 
cannot  always  be  distinguished  from  the  subjunctive  (e.  g. 
gamat  might  be  the  subj.  of  a-gan  or  the  inj.  of  a-gamat) 
or  from  an  unaugmented  indicative  (e.  g.  carah  might  be  = 
a-carah).  Judged  by  its  uses  the  inj.  probably  represents 
a  very  primitive  verbal  form  which  originally  expressed  an 
action  irrespective  of  tense  or  mood,  the  context  showing 


350  OUTLINES  OF  SYNTAX  [215 

which  was  meant.  The  addition  of  the  augment  gave  the 
sense  of  a  past  tense  to  one  set  of  forms,  while  the  rest 
finally  became  incorporated  with  the  impv.  The  general 
meaning  of  the  inj.  expresses  a  desire,  combining  the  senses 
of  the  subj.,  the  opt.,  and  the  impv.  As  compared  with  the 
subj.,  the  inj.  is  essentially  appropriate  in  principal  clauses, 
though  it  sometimes  appears  in  subordinate  clauses  intro- 
duced by  relatives  or  the  relative  conjunctions  yad  and 
yada. 

a.  The  first  person  expresses  an  intention  the  execution 
of  which  lies  in  the  power  of  the  speaker ;  e.  g.  indrasya 
nil  vlryani  pra  vocam  now  I  will  proclaim  the  heroic  deeds  of 
Indra  (i.  32^).  Sometimes,  however,  the  execution  depends 
on  another  ;  e.  g.  agnim  hinvantu  no  dhiyas  :  t6na  jesma 
dhanam-dhanam  let  our  prayers  urge  Agni :  through  him  we 
shall  assuredhj  ivin  booty  after  booty  (x.  156^). 

h.  The  second  person  is  used  exhortatively,  very  often 
beside  an  impv.  ;  e.  g.  suga  nah  supatha  krnu ;  pusann 
iha  kratum  vidah.  do  thou  malce  fair  paths  for  us  easy  to 
traverse ;  0  Pamn,  here  procure  us  vnsdom ;  adya  no  deva 
savih  saubhagam,  para  dusvapnyam  suva  to-day,  0  god, 
procure  us  good  fortune;  drive  an-ay  evil  dream  (v.  82^). 
A  parallel  opt.  is  much  less  common  ;  e.  g.  et6na  gatum 
vido  nah;  a  no  vavrtyah.  suvitaya  by  reason  of  that  find 
for  us  thejMth  ;  mayst  thou  bring  us  to  tvelfare  (i.  173'^'). 

c.  The  third  person  also  is  used  exhortatively,  very  often 
beside  an  impv. ;  e.  g.  s^mam  vetu  vasatkrtim ;  agnir 
jusata  no  girah  let  him  come  to  this  Vasat  call;  may  Agni 
accept  our  songs  (vii.  15''') ;  it  is  often  accompanied  by  a 
2.  sing.  impv. ;  e.  g.  a^idam  barhir  yajamanasya  sida ; 
atha  ca  bhud  uktham  indraya  sastam.  seat  thyself  upon  this 
straw  of  the  sacrificer ;  and  then  may  the  hymn  be  sung  to  Indra 
(iii.  53'^).  It  appears  less  frequently  with  the  subj.  ;  e.  g- 
lipa  brahmani  srnava  ima  no,  atha  te  yajnas  tanve  vayo 
dhat  mayst  thou  listen  to  these  our  prayers,  and  then  let  the 


215]  INJUNCTIVE  351 

sacrifice  hesiow  vir/our  on  flu/self  (vi.  40*).  A  parallel  opt.  is 
not  common  ;  e.  g.  pari  no  heti  rudrasya  vrjyah,  pari 
tvesasya  durmatir  mahi  gat  would  that  the  dart  of  liudra 
2XISS  its  hij,  Jet  the  great  malevolence  of  the  impetuous  one  avoid 
us  (ii.  33^*). 

d.  The  injunctive  is  very  frequently  used  alone  (unaccom- 
panied by  any  other  modal  form)  in  an  impv.  sense  ;  e.  g. 
ima  havya  jusanta  nah  let  them  accept   these  oblations  of 
ours  (vi.  52^^) ;  the  preceding  verse  has  the  regular  impv.  : 
jusantarn  yujyam  payah  let  them  accept  the  suitable  milk. 

In  negative  sentences  the  inj.  is  the  only  mood  (with  the 
exception  of  the  single  opt.  form  bhujema)  with  which 
the  prohibitive  particle  ma  can  be  used  ;  e.  g.  ma  na  indra 
para  vrnak  do  not,  0  Indra,  abandon  us  (viii.  97') ;  visvayan 
ma  na  a  gan  let  not  any  sivelling  thing  come  near  us  (vii.  50^) ; 
ma  tantus  chedi  let  not  the  thread  be  cut  (ii.  28'').  The  aor. 
form  is  commoner  than  the  impf.  form  in  the  EV.,  but  its 
relative  predominance  has  greatly  increased  in  the  AV. 

e.  The  inj.  not  infrequently  expresses  a  future  sense  like 
the  subj.  (215  C)  in  two  types  of  sentences  : 

1.  in  positive  interrogative  sentences  ;  e.  g.  ko  no  mahya 
aditaye  piinar  dat  who  will,  give  tis  bach  to  great  Aditi? 
(i.  24^).  The  subj.  itself  is  here  sometimes  found  beside  it ; 
e.g.  kada  martam  aradhasani  pada ksumpam  iva sphurat, 
kada  nah  susravad  girah  when  will  he  spurn  the  niggardly 
mortal  like  a  mushroom  ivith  his  foot ;  when  will  he  hear  our 
songs  ?  (i.  84^). 

2.  in  negative  sentences  with  na  ;  e.  g.  yam  aditya  abhi 
druho  raksatha,  n6m  agham  nasat  ivhom,  0  Adityas,  ye 
protect  from  harm,  him  misfortune  ivill  not  reach  (viii.  47^). 

a.  In  B.  the  use  of  the  inj.  in  positive  sentences  has  almost  entirely 
disappeared.  The  SB.,  however,  preserves  several  examples  ;  e.  g. 
devan  avat  let  it  refresh  the  gods  ;  also  sometimes  in  subordinate 
clauses,  especially  with  n6d;  e.g.  n6d  idarn  babirdha  yajiSad  bhfivat 
Jest  ii  be  outside  the  sacrifice. 

On  the  other  hand  the  inj.  is  very  frequent  in  negative  sentences, 


352  OUTLINES  OF  SYNTAX  [2ir, 

in  which  it  constantly  appears  with  ma,  in  the  vast  majority  of  cases 
in  the  aor.  form.  Only  a  few  examples  of  the  impf.  form  oocur  :  ma 
vadhadhvam  slay  not  {TS.) ;  ma  bibhita /ear  not  (AB.);  kilbisam  nu 
ma  yatayan  Jet  them  not  reprove  it  as  a  fault  (AB.) ;  and  from  the  perfect : 
ma  susupthah  sleep  not  (SB.). 

C.  Subjunctive. 

The  meaning  of  the  subj.  is  best  brought  out  by  contrast- 
ing its  use  with  that  of  the  opt.     From  this  it  appears  that 
the  fundamental  sense  of  the  subj.  is  will,  while  that  of  the 
opt,  is  either  wish  or  possibility  (this  mood  being  therefore 
alternatively  called  optative  or  potential).     This  distinction 
appears  clearly  from  the  fact  that  in  the  first  person  in 
independent  sentences  one  group  of  verbs  in  the  RV.  employs 
the  subj.  exclusively  or  almost  exclusively,  while  another 
employs  the  opt.,  because  in  the  former  the  execution  is 
dependent  on  the  will  of  the  speaker,  while  in  the  latter 
it  is  not  in  his  control,  but  is  only  possible.    With  the  subj. 
are  thus  used  the  verbs  han  strike,  kr  make,  su  press,  bru 
speak.     With  the  opt.  on  the-  other  hand  appear :  ji  conquer, 
tr  overcome,  sah  conquer ;  as  and  nas  obtain,  vid  acquire,  is 
he  master  of;   sac  he  associated  with  ;  a-vrt  attract  (to  the 
sacrifice) ;  sak  he  ahle  ;  mad  he  liappy  ;  vdih. prosper  ;  pas  lire 
to  see;  as  he  (with  predicates  such  as  prosperoiis,  &c.);  also 
certain  sacrificial  verbs :  idh  kindle  (with  the  co-operation  of 
the  god),  das  worship,  vac  and  vad  s^^eaJx  (effectively),  vidh 
serve,  sap  please  =  ohtain  the  favour  of  [a  god),  hti  call  {=  hring 
hither). 

1.  The  meanings  expressed  by  the  different  persons  of  the 
subj.  are  the  following: 

The  first  person  declares  the  will  of  the  speaker  ;  e.  g. 
svastaye  vayum  lipa  bravamahai /or  weZ/are  we  mil' invoke 
Vmju  (v.  51^2)_  It  is  often  accompanied  by  the  particles  nti 
and  hanta  ;  e.  g.  pra  nii  voca  sut6su  vam  I  will  noiv  praise 
you  two  at  the  lihations  (v.  69^).  The  1.  du.  and  pi.  may  also 
express  an  exhortation  to  another  to  share  an  action  with 


•215]  SUBJUNCTIVE  353 

the  speaker,  an  impv.  usually  then  preceding;  e.g.  daksi- 
nato  bhava  me  :  adha  vrtrani  janghanava  bhuri  stand  on 
my  right :  then  we  two  ivill  slay  many  Joes  (x.  83'') ;  or  an 
exhortation  to  aid  the  speaker  ;  e.  g.  j6sama^indra  tvaya 
yuja  we  will  conquer  {=  let  us  conqner)  with  thee  as  our  ally 
(viii.  63"). 

In  B.  the  usage  is  the  same;  e.g.  vdram  vrnai  /  will  choose  a  hoon 
(TS.)  ;  hanta^iman  bhisayai  ivell,Iivill  terri/ij  tlitm  (AB.)  ;  vayum  deva 
abruvan  :  soraam  rajanam  hanama^_^iti  the  gods  said  to  Vdiju  :  let  us  slay 
king  Soma  [TS.). 

The  second  person  is  used  exhortatively  :  hano  vrtram, 
jaya  apah  slay  Vrtra,  ivin  the  waters  (i.  80^).  It  often 
follows  a  2.  pers.  impv.  ;  e.  g.  agne  srnuhi ;  dev^bhyo 
bravasi/zcflr,  OAgni,  do  thou  say  to  the  gods  {i.  139");  sometimes 
it  follows  a  3.  pers.  impv.  ;  e.  g.  a  vam  vahantu  .  .  asvah, 
pibatho  asm6  madhuni  let  the  horses  hring  you  two ;  do  ye 
drink  the  honied  draughts  beside  its  (vii.  67').  When  an 
expectation  is  indicated,  the  subj.  is  almost  equivalent  to 
a  future  ;  e.  g.  achanta  me,  chadayatha  ca  nunam  ye  have 
pleased  me  and  ye  shall  please  me  now  (i.  165^^). 

In  B.  the  2.  pers.  subj.  is  used  only  wlien  the  speaker  makes  a  condi- 
tion or  gives  a  direction  i-elating  to  the  (not  immediate)  future  ;  e.g. 
atho  etam  varam  avrnita  :  maya^eva  pracim  disam  pra  janatha>_^iti 

so  he  made  this  condition:  through  me  ije  shall  (in  lutiirej  discover  the  eastern 
quarter  (AB.). 

The  third  person  is  as  a  rule  used  in  exhortations  to  the 
gods,  though  the  subject  is  not  always  the  name  of  the  deity; 
e.g.  imam  nah  srnavad  dhavam  he  shall  hear  this  our 
eall  (viii.  43--);  pari  no  h61o  varunasya  vrjyah ;  uriim 
na  indrah  krnavad  u  lokam  may  the  ivrath  of  Varuna 
avoid  us:  Indra  shall  procure  us  tvide  space  (vii.  84^);  sa 
devam  a^iha  vaksati  he  shall  bring  the  gods  hitJier  (i.  1^) ;  pra 
te  sumna  no  asnavan  thy  good  intentions  shall  reach  tis 
(viii.  90").  The  subj.  sentence  is  sometimes  connected  with 
a  preceding  one  ;  e.g.  agnim  ile  :  sa  u  sravat  I  praise  Agni : 
he  shall  hear  (viii.  43-*).    The  subj.  here  often  approaches  the 

1811)  A  a 


354  OUTLINES  OF  SYNTAX  [2i5 

future  in  sense,  being  then  usually  opposed  with  nunam  or 
nu  to  another  verb  :  lid  u  sya  devah  savita  .  .  asthat : 
nunam  dev^bhyo  vi  hi  dhati  ratnam  (/od  Savitr  has  just 
arisen :  he  trill  now  distribute  hount//  to  the  gods  (ii.  38') ; 
uvasa^usa  uchac  ca  nii  Dawn  has  flushed  (in  the  past)  and 
she  will  flush  notv  (i,  48^).  Sometimes  there  is  no  opposition  ; 
e.g.  a  gha  ta  gachan  uttara  yugani,  yatra  jamayah  krna- 
van  ajami  there  shall  come  those  later  generations  tvhen  those 
who  are  akin  will  do  what  hefits  not  Jcinsinen  (x.  10^"). 

In  B.  the  3.  pers.  subj.  is  not  found  in  the  hortative  sense,  appearing 
only  when  a  condition,  promise,  or  curse  is  expressed  ;  e.g.  vrnisva,^^ 
ity  abruvan  ;  so  'bravin  :  maddevatya^_^eva  samid  asad  iti  they  said  • 
choose  a  boon  ;  he  replied  :  the  fuel  shall  he  sacred  to  me  (MS.);  sa^abravid  : 
v£ram  vrnai ;  khatat  parabhavisyanti  mauye  :  tSto  ma  para  bhiivam 
iti  ;  pura  te  samvatsarad  api  rohad  ity  abravit  she  said  :  I  7dU  make  a 
condition;  I  think  I  shall  perish  in  consequence  of  digging  ;  lei  me  not  perish. 
He  repAied  :  before  the  lapse  of  a  year  for  you,  it  (the  wound)  shall  heal  up 
(TS.) ;  devas  tan  asapan :  svena  vah  kiskuna  vajrena  vrscan  iti  Uie 
gods  cursed  them  (the  trees)  :  they  shall  destroy  you  with  your  oivn  handle, 
icith  a  bolt  (TB.).  The  3.  pers.  subj.  often  also  expresses  the  purpose  of 
a  ceremony  ;  e.  g.  srnad  iti  saram&yani  barhfr  bhavati  (MS.)  the  litter  is 
made  of  reeds  with  the  intention  ;  it  shall  destroy  Mm  (the  adversary). 

2.  The  syntactical  employment  of  the  subj.  is  twofold. 

a.  It  appears  in  principal  sentences : 

a.  with  interrogatives,  either  the  pronoun  or  the  adverbs 
katha  how  ?  kada  ivhen,  and  kuvid ;  e.  g.  kim  u.  nu  vah 
krnavama  what,  pray,  shall  ive  do  for  you?  (ii.  29'');  katha 
mah6  rudriyaya  bravama  how  shall  tvc  speak  to  the  great 
Budra-host?  (v.  41");  kada  nah  susravad  girah  when  ivill 
he  hear  our  prayers?  (i.  84-).  kuvid  nearly  always  accen- 
tuates the  verb  (which  is  thus  ti'eated  as  in  a  subordinate 
clause) ;  e.  g.  asvina  sii  rse  stuhi  :  kuvit  te  sravato  havam 
the  Aivins  2>fC'^se  well,  0  seer:  shall  they  hear  thy  call? 
(viii.  26^0). 

In  B.  first  persons  only  seem  to  be  met  with  in  this  use,  and  an 
interrogative  word  is  sometimes  lacking. 

/3.  In  negative  sentences  with  na  not ;  e.  g.  na  ta  nasanti ; 


215]  SUBJUNCTIVE  355 

na  dabhati  taskarah  they  rierish  not ;  no  thief  shall  {can)  harm 
them  (vi.  28''). 

In  B.  ni,  is  similarly  used  ;  e.  g.  nd,^at6  'parah  kis  cand.  sahd  siri- 
rena^amfto  'sat  from  noio  omcards  no  otie  shall  be  immortal  tcilh  his  hodij 
(SB.).  Once  only,  in  a  command,  is  the  suhj.  used  with  ma  :  akamam 
sma  ma  ni  padyasai  you  shall  not  approach  me  (in  future)  against  my  tcill 

(SB.). 

1).  In  dependent  clauses  the  subj.  is  used  either  with  a 
negative  or  with  relatives  (pronominal  or  adverbial) : 

a.  in  a  final  sense  with  the  negative  particle  n^d  that  not, 
lest.  The  antecedent  clause  has  either  an  ind.  or  an  impv.  ; 
e.g.  hotrad  aham  varuna  bibhyad  ay  am,  n6d  eva  ma 
yunajann  atra  devah  fearing  the  office  of  Hotr,  0  Varuna, 
I  locnt  away,  lest  the  gods  should  appoint  me  thereto  (x.  51*); 
vy  ueha  duhitar  divo  ma  cirarn  taniitha  apah,  n6t  tva 
stenam  yatha  ripiim  tapati  siiro  arcisa  shine  forth,  daugh- 
ter of  the  shy,  delay  not  long  thy  irorh,  lest  the  sun  scorch  thee, 
Wee  a  hostile  thief,  with  his  ray  (v.  79^). 

In  B.  tlie  antecedent  clause  has  either  an  ind.  or  an  opt.  ;  e.  g.  Stha 
yan  na  pr^ksate,  n^n  ma  rudro  hinasad  iti  noiu  (the  reason)  why  he  does 
not  look  is  lest  Rudra  should  injure  him  (SB.) ;  tdn  ni,  dadbhih  khaded, 
nin  ma  idSm  rudrfyam  dato  hiudsad  iti  he  should  not  cheic  it  loith  his 
teeth,  lest  this  that  belongs  to  Rudra  injure  his  teeth  (SB.).  A  gerundive  in 
the  antecedent  clause  has  also  been  noted  in  che  AB. 

\ 
/3.  in  relative  clauses  : 

1.  such  a  clause  normally  precedes  if  it  contains  a  suppo- 
sition determining  the  sense  of  the  princij^al  clause  ;  the 
latter  usually  has  an  impv.,  not  infrequently  a  subj.,  seldom 
an  inj.  or  ind.;  e.g.  yo  nah  prtanyad,  apa  tam-tam  id 
dhatam  ivhoever  shall  combat  us,  him  do  ye  two  slay  (i.  132''); 
yas  tiibhyam  dasan  na  tarn  amho  asnavat  n^ho  shall  serve 
thee,  him  no  distress  can  reach  (ii.  23'^);  iita  nunam  yad  in- 
driyam  karisya  indra  paumsyam,  adya  nakis  tad  a 
minat  and  what  heroic,  manly  deed  thou,  Indra,  shall  now  do, 
that  let  no  one  belittle  to-day  (iv.  30^^) ;  yasmai  tvam  sukrte 
jataveda,    u   lokam  agne    krnavah   syonam,    sa   rayim 

A  a  2 


356  OUTLINES  OF  SYNTAX  [215 

nasate  svasti  tlic  righteous  man  for  whom  thou  shalt  procure, 
0  Agni  Jdtavedas,  a  comfortahk  place,  he  obtains  riches  for 
welfare  (v.  4"). 

In  B.  the  use  of  the  subj.  in  rehitivo  chiuses  is  similar  ;  but  here 
the  subj.  is  by  fiir  the  commonest  form  in  the  principal  clause,  the 
imp%'.  and  ind.  (sometimes  omitted)  being  rare;  e.g.  tany  abru- 
van,  v^ram  vrnamahai  :  yad  asuran  jayama,  td.n  uah  saha^asad  iti 
ihey  said,  ive  ivill  make  a  condition  :  what  we  shall  win  from  the  Asuras  that 
shall  be  ours  in  common  (TS.) ;  yd.s  tva  k&s  ca^upayat,  tiisnim  evd^asva 
whoever  shall  come  towards  ijou,  sit  still ;  yad  vindasai  td.t  te  'gnihotram 
kurmah  what  thou  shalt  find,  that  loe  (shall )  make  thy  fire-ohlation  (MS.)  ; 
tad  vdi  sd.mrddham  yam  devah  sadhdve  karmane  jusantai  that,  indeed, 
(is)  excellent,  if  the  gods  shall  he  pleased  ioilh  liimfor  a  good  luork  (SB.).  In 
the  last  example  the  relative  clause  exceptionally  follows. 

2.  The  relative  clause  follows  if  it  expresses  a  final  or 
consequential  sense  {in  order  that,  so  that)  arising  from  the 
principal  clause  ;  the  latter  usually  has  an  impv.,  but  some- 
times an  inj.,  opt.,  or  ind.;  e.g.  sam  pusan  vidusa  naya, 
yo  anjasa^anusasati,  ya  eva^idam  iti  bravat  associate  us, 
0  Pamn,  ivith  a  wise  (guide)  ivlio  shall  at  once  direct  us  and 
who  shall  saij  :  liere  it  is  (vi.  54') ;  asmabhyam  tad  radha  a 
gat,  sam  yat  stotrbhya  apaye  bhavati  let  that  wealth  come 
for  us  tvhich  shall  he  a  blessing  to  thy  praisers  and  thy  kinsman 
(ii.  38^');  tad  adya  vacah  prathamam  masiya  y^na^asu- 
ram  abhi  deva  asama  I  woidcl  to-day  think  of  that  as  the 
first  (point)  of  my  speech  whereby  ive  gods  shall  overcome  the 
Asuras  (x.  53*) ;  imam  bibharmi  sukrtarn  te  ankusam 
y^na^arujasi  maghavaii  chapharujah  I  bring  to  thee  this 
well -fashioned  ivcapon  {icith  irhich  =)  in  order  that  thou  shouldst 
break  the  hoof-breakers  (x.  44'-').  The  subj.  of  these  relative 
clauses  sometimes  comes  to  have  a  purely  future  sense ; 
e.  g.  6  (==a^u)  te  yanti  ye  aparisu  pasyan  those  are  coming 
who  in  future  days  will  see  her  (i.  113"). 

In  B.  this  type  of  relative  clause  with  the  subj.  is  rare  ;  e.  g.  yd,n  ma 
dhindvat  tan  me  kuruta  procure  for  me  that  wliich  shall  refresh  me  (SB.)  ; 
h4iita  vayam  tat  srjamahai  yad  asmaa  anvasad  iti  come,  let  us  create 
what  shall  corns  after  us  (SB.). 


215]  SUBJUNCTIVE  357 

y.   with  relative  conjunctions  : 

1.  yad,  which,  if  the  clause  is  determinative,  means  when  ; 
the  dependent  clause  then  precedes,  while  the  principal  clause 
usually  contains  an  impv.,  but  sometimes  an  inj.,  a  subj,, 
or  an  opt. ;  the  conjunction  means  in  order  that,  so  that,  if  the 
dependent  clause  is  final  or  consequential ;  the  dependent 
clause  then  follows,  while  the  principal  clause  contains  an 
impv.,  a  subj.,  or  an  ind.,  e.  g. 

if  yad  =  when :  liso  yad  adya  bhanuna  vi  dvarav 
rnavo  divah,  pra  no  yachatad  avrkam  0  Baivn,  ivhen  to- 
dan  ^^'''^*  %  beam  thou  shalt  open  the  doors  of  heaven,  then 
bestow  on  us  safe  shelter  (i.  48^^) ;  yad  adya  bhagam  vibhaj- 
asi  nrbhya,  uso  devo  no  atra  savita  damuna  anagaso 
vocati  suryaya  irhen  thou  shalt  to-day  distribute  a  share  to  men, 
0  Baivn,  god  Savitr,  the  house  friend,  shall  declare  us  guiltless 
to  Sfrnja  (i.  123^);  yad  va  agah  purusata  karama,  ma  vas 
tasyam  apt  bhuma  ivhen  tve  shall  commit  a  sin  against  you 
after  the  manner  of  men,  let  us  not  have  a  part  m  that  (shaft)  of 
yours  (vii.  57*) ;  yad  didyavah  prtanasu  prakrilan,  tasya 
vam  syama  sanitara  aj^h.  ivhen  shafts  shall  play  in  battles,  of 
that  conflict  of  yours  tve  ivould  be  the  tvinners  (iv.  41"). 

if  yad  =  in  order  that,  or  so  that :  sa  a  vaha  devatatim 
yavistha,  sardho  yad  adya  divyam  yajasi  so  bring  hither  the 
gods,  0  youngest,  that  thou  mayst  adore  the  heavenly  host  to-day 
(iii.  19'*);  tav6d  u  tah  sukirtayo  'sann  uta  prasastayah, 
yad  indra  mrlayasi  nah  these  laudations  and  praises  shall 
be  thine,  that  thou,  0  Indra,  mayst  be  merciful  to  us  (viii.  45^^); 
na  papaso  manamahe,  yad  in  nv  indrarn  sakhayam  krnav- 
amahai  we  deem  not  ourselves  wicked,  [so]  that  tve  can  notv 
make  Indra  our  friend  (viii.  61").  In  such  posterior  clauses 
the  yad  sometimes  comes  to  express  the  content  of  the 
principal  clause  ;  e,  g.  na  te  sakha  sakhyam  vasty  etat, 
salaksma  yad  visurupa  bhavati  (x.  10-)  thy  friend  tvishes 
not  this  friendship,  that  she  who  is  of  the  same  type  (=  akin) 
shall  become  of  a  different  hind  {=  not  akin).     This  yad  may 


358  OUTLINES  OF  SYNTAX  [215 

once  be  translated  by  till :  kiyaty  a  yat  samaya  bhavati 
ya  vyusiir  yas  ea  nunam  vyuchan  in  tchat  time  loill  it  he 
that  {=  how  long  will  it  be  till)  she  shall  he  hetween  those  that 
have  shone  forth  and  those  that  shall  noiv  shine  forth?  (i.  113^-'). 

In  B.  tlie  subj.  is  rarely  found  in  tlicse  clauses  with  yad  ;  e.g.  tdt 
prapnuhi  ydt  te  prano  vatam  apipddyatai  attain  this  that  xjour  breath 
shall  transfer  itself  to  the  ivind  (SB.). 

2.  yatra  tvhen  seems  not  to  occur  in  V.  with  the  subj. 
when  it  is  a  genuine  conjunction  (that  is,  when  it  is  not 
equivalent  to  the  loc.  of  the  relative  pronoun). 

In  B.,  however,  it  is  found  with  the  subj.  in  the  sense  of 
a  future  perfect ;  e.  g.  yatra  hota  chandasah  param  gachat, 
tat  pratiprasthata  prataranuvakam  upa  kurutat  when 
the  Hotr  shall  have  got  to  the  end  of  the  metre,  then  let  the  Prati- 
prasthafr  start  a  Prdtaranuvdka  (SB.). 

3.  yatha  with  the  subj.  as  an  antecedent  clause  means  as, 
the  principal  clause  containing  an  impv.  or  a  subj.  ;  as  a 
posterior  clause  it  has  the  sense  of  in  order  that,  so  that,  the 
principal  clause  containing  either  a  demand  (generally  impv., 
occasionally  inj.,  opt.,   or  gerundive)  or  a  statement  (ind. 
pres.  or  aor.,  act.  or  pass.).     Examples  of  the  first  use  are  : 
yatha  hotar  manuso  devatata  yajasi,  eva  no  adya  yaksi 
devan  as  thou  canst,  0  priest,  worship  at  the  divine  service  of  man, 
so  do  thou  fonts  to-day  tvorship  the  gods  (vi.  4').  This  use  does 
not  seem  to  occur  in  B.  Examples  of  the  second  use  are :  grhan 
gacha  grhapatni  yatha^asah  go  to  the  house  that  you  may  he 
mistress   of  the  house   (x.  85-«) ;    idanim  ahna   upavacyo 
nrbhih,  sr^stham  no  atra  dravinam  yatha  dadhat  at  this 
time  of  day  he  is  to  he  addressed  hy  men  that  he  may  here  hesfow 
on  us  the  hest  tvealth  (iv.  5A');  mahatam  a  vrnimah6  'vo, 
yatha  vasu  nasamahai  ice  implore  the  favour  of  the  great  in 
order  that  ice  may  ohtain  riches  (x.  36") ;  idam  patram  apayi 
matsad  yatha  saumanasaya  devam  this  hotel  has  heen  drunk 
up,   in   order  that  it  may   exhilarate   the  god  to    henevolence 
(vi.  44:''^).     The  negative  in  such  clauses  is  na  or  nu. 


215]  SUBJUNCTIVE  359 

n.  Ill  B.  thii  usage  is  similar:  tlio  priiici[)al  clause  here  contains 
either  an  iiupv.  or  a  subj. ;  e.g.  tatha  me  kuru  yathaj^^ahani  imam 
senam  jayaiii  so  arrange  for  me  that  I  maij  cvnqacr  this  armij  (AB.);  sam- 
dham  nii  sam  dadhavahai  ydtha  tvam  evd,  pravisaniti  now  let  us  two 
make  an  agreement  in  order  that  I  may  enter  into  thee  (MS.). 

4.  yada  when,  with  the  subj.  (pres.  or  aor.),  which  then 
has  the  vahie  of  a  fut.  perf.,  is  regularly  antecedent,  the 
principal  clause  containing  an  imjiv.  or  a  subj.;  e.g.  srtani 
yada  karasi  jatavedo,  atha^im  enam  pari  dattat  pitr- 
bhyah  icJien  thou  shall  have  made  him  clone,  then  deliver  him  to 
the  fathers  (x.  16-) ;  yada  gachaty  asunitim  etam,  atha 
devanam  vasanir  bhavati  tvheii  he  shall  have  gone  to  that 
spirit  ivorld,  then  he  shall  become  subject  to  the  gods  (x.  16^). 
yada  kada  ca  whenever  seems  to  give  the  verb  the  same 
sense :  yada  kada  ea  sunavama  somam,  agnis  tva  dut6 
dhanvaty  acha  whenever  ive  shall  have  pressed  Soma,  Agni 
shall  hasten  to  thee  as  a  messenger  (iii.  53*). 

a.  The  usage  of  B.  is  the  same  ;  e.  g.  sd,  yada  tdm  ativardha,  atha 
karsdm  khatvS,  tdsyam  m.a  bibharasi  uilien  I  shall  have  outgroivn  that 
(vessel),  then  having  dug  a  trench  you  shall  keep  me  in  it  (SB.). 

5.  yadi  ?/with  the  subj.  generally  precedes  the  principal 
clause,  which  contains  an  impv.,  a  subj.,  (rarely)  an  opt.,  or 
an  ind.  (sometimes  to  be  supplied);  e.g.  yadi  stomam 
mama  sravad,  asmakam  indram  indavo  mandantu  if  he 
shall  hear  my  praise,  let  these  drops  of  ours  gladden  Indra 
(viii.  !'■') ;  yajama  devan  yadi  saknavama  ive  will  adore  the 
gods,  if  we  shall  be  able  (i.  27'^);  yadi  prati  tvam  haryah  .  . 
apa  ena  jayema  if  thou  shall  accept  (it)  gladly,  we  might  thereby 
win  the  waters  (v.  2'');  indra  ha  varuna  dh^stha,  yadi 
somaih  .  .  madayaite  Indra  and  Vani/ia  (are)  the  most 
liberal,  if  they  shtdl  delight  in  the  Soma  offerings  (iv.  4P). 

a.  In  B.  the  suhj.  with  yd,di  is  very  rare  ;  an  example  is  :  yidi  tva,_, 
etdt  punar  bravatas,  tvdm  brCitat  if  they  two  shall  say  this  again  to  thee,  do 
thou  say  (SB.). 

6.  yad  so  long  as  occurs  twice  with  the  subj.  in  the  RV.  : 
ananukrtyam  apunas  cakara  yat  siiryamasa  mitha  ucca- 


360  OUTLINES  OF  SYNTAX  [215-216 

ratah  lie  has  once  for  all  done  ivliat  is  inimitahle  so  long  as  sun 
and  moon  alternately  shall  rise  (x.  68^") ;  vasistham  ha  varu- 
no  .  .  rsim  cakara  .  .  yan  nu  dyavas  tatanan,  yad  usasah. 
Variina  has  made  Vasidha  a  seer,  so  long  as  the  days  shall 
extend,  so  long  as  the  dairns  (vii.  88*).  In  B.  yad  dops  not 
occur. 

8.  Tlie  subj.  is  sometimes  used  in  an  antecedent  clause 
with  ca  in  the  sense  of  if,  which  is  then  treated  as  a  subor- 
dinate conjunction  and  accentuates  the  verb;  e.g.  indras 
ca  mrlayati  no,  na  nah  pascad  agharn  nasat  if  Indra 
shall  he  gracious  to  us,  no  evil  shall  afterwards  touch  us  {ii.  41"). 

D.   Optative  or  Potential. 

216.  1.  The  meaning  of  the  opt.  is  predominantly  a 
wish,  which  is  modified  according  to  the  person  of  the  verb. 

The  first  person,  which  is  very  common,  expresses  the 
wish  of  the  speaker,  generally  addressed  to  the  gods  ;  e.  g. 
lisas  tarn,  asyara  yasasam  rayim  0  Dawn,  I  would  obtain 
that  glorious  wealth  (i.  92*^) ;  vidhema  te  stomaih  we  would 
worship  thee  ivith  songs  of  praise  {il9^);  vayam  syama  patayo 
rayinam  we  would  he  lords  of  riches  (iv.  50''). 

In  B.  the  sense  of  the  first  person  is  similar,  but  its  occurrence, 
owing  to  the  nature  of  the  subject-matter,  is  far  less  common;  e.g. 
vise  ca  ksatraya  <;a  sarnddam  kuryam  /  should  like  to  create  enmity  lehceen 
people  and  nobility  (MS.). 

The  second  person  is  much  less  common.  It  is  almost 
exclusively  used  to  express  a  wish  or  a  request  addressed  to 
a  o^od  ;  e.  g.  a  no  mitravaruna  hotraya  vavrtyah  jyraij  hring 
M'ttra  and  Varitna  to  our  oblation  (vi.  11^);  tya  me  havam  a 
jagmyatam  so,  pray,  do  ye  two  come  to  my  call  (vi.  50^*') ;  pra 
six  na  ayur  jivase  tiretana  do  ye,  pray,  extend  fully  our 
allotted  span  that  we  may  live  (viii.  IS-^).  We  might  here 
often  rather  expect  the  impv.,  which  indeed  frequently 
either  precedes  or  follows  the  2.  opt.  ;  e.g.  dhisva  vajram 
raksohatyaya :  sasahistha  abhi  sprdhah  take  the  holt  for 


1 


2i(>]  OPTATIVE  361 

the  slaughter  of  the  demons :  mai/st  thou  overcome  our  foes 
(vi.  45"^);  imam  me  samidham  vaneh;  ima  u  sxi  srudhi 
girah  pray  accept  this  my  fuel ;  graciously  hear  these  songs 
(ii.  6^). 

In  B.  the  second  i>crson  is  used  almost  exclusively  in  wishes ;  e.  g. 
asmin  y^jamane  bahvyah  syata  may  you.  he  numerous  he,f.ide  this  sacrificer 
(SB.). 

The  third  person  is  used  in  the  three  different  senses  of 
wish,  precept,  or  supposition;  e.g.  midhvam  asmakara 
babhuyat  may  he  be  bountiful  to  us  (i.  27^) ;  imam  amrtam 
diitam  krnvita  martyah  this  immortal  the  mortal  should  make 
his  messenger  {\m.  23'^);  prnann  apir  aprnantam  abhi  syat 
the  friend  who  bestoivs  woidd  prevail  over  him  who  does  not 
bestow  (x.ll7').  In  the  sense  of  a  sujiposition  (regarded  as 
possible  or  probable)  the  opt.  seldom  appears  independently, 
but  often  in  an  apodosis. 

In  B.  it  is  common  in  all  three  senses  :  expressing  a  wish  ;  e.  g.  apas- 

uh  syat  inatj  lie  he  hereft  of  cattle  (TS.)  ;  a  general  precept  (where  a 
gerundive  may  also  be  used)  ;  e.  g.  ksdume  vdsana  agnim  a  dadhiya- 
tam,  te  adhvaryave  deye  wearing  linen  garments  the  tiro  should  lay  tlie 
fire  :  the  two  (garments)  should  be  given  to  the  Adhvari/u  (MS.);  a  supposition 
in  the  apodosis  of  periods,  but  reldom  independently  ;  e.g.  nd^asya 
tam  ratrim  apo  grhan  prd  hareyur  ;  apo  v&i  santih. :  samdyeyur  eva 
(MS.)  tliey  should  not  during  that  night  bring  ivafer  into  his  house  ;  for  water 
is  extinction  :  they  would  thus  extinguish  (if  they  did  this).  The  protasis 
in  this  example  must  be  supplied. 

2.  The  syntactical  employment  of  the  optative  is  two- 
fold : 

a.  it  appears  in  principal  sentences  (for  the  most  part  re- 
taining the  sense  of  a  wish)  with  interrogatives,  either  the 
pronoun  or  the  adverbs  katha  hotv  ?  kada  when  1  and  kuvid  ; 
e.  g.  kasmai  devaya  havisa  vidhema  what  god  would  ive 
ivorship  tviih  oblation!  (x.  121');  kada  na  indra  raya  a 
dasasyeh  when  wouldst  thou,  0  Indra,  bestow  riches  upon  us  ? 
(vii.  37^);  kuvit  tutujyat  sataye  dhiyab  (i.  143'')  would  he 
not  stimulate  our  prayers  for  gain  ?  (cp.  p.  354,  2  a).  A  possi- 
bility is  sometimes  thus  repudiated;  e.g.  kad  dha  nunam. 


362  OUTLINES  OF  SYNTAX  [216 

rta  vadanto   anrtam   rapema  liow  could  ice  noiv  spcaMng 
righteous  ivords  utter  unrigJifeousness  ?  (x.  10'*). 

In  B.  the  optative  with  interrogatives  may  express  a  wisli,  precept, 
possibility,  or  the  repudiation  of  a  suggestion  :  e.  g.  kathdm  nu  pr4 
jayeya  hoiv  sJwxdd  I  propagate  myself?  (SB.) ;  yamim  eva  purvam  samset 
}te  should  first  pronounce  Ihefonnula  addressed  to  Yama  (^AB.);  kim  mama 
t^tah  syat  (SB.)  ichat  would  then  accrue  to  me  {i{  1  did  tliis)'?  kd,3  tdd.  a 
driyeta  2cho  loould  pay  attention  to  that  ?  (SB.). 

a.  The  opt.  appears  in  negative  sentences  with  na  not, 
sometimes  nu.  eid  never.  The  sense  is  either  optative  or 
potential ;  e.  g.  na  risyema  kada  cana  may  we  never  suffer 
harm  (vi.  54^);  nil  cin  nii  vayor  amrtam  vi  dasyet  may 
the  nectar  of  Vdyu  never  fail  (vi.  37^) ;  na  tad  devo  na  mar- 
tyas  tuturyad  yani  pravrddho  vrsabhas  cakara  no  god, 
no  mortal  could  surpass  what  the  migldy  hull  has  done  (viii.  96^). 
The  only  opt.  form  with  which  the  prohibitive  ma  occurs  is 
bhujema:  ma  va  6no  anyakrtam  bhujema  may  toe  not 
suffer  hefore  you  for  a  sin  done  hy  others  (vi.  51"). 

In  B.  the  opt.  is  used  with  nd  to  express  either  a  general  prohibition 
or  a  potential  sense  ;  e.  g.  tdsya^etdd  vrat&m  :  nd^dnrtam  vaden,  n£ 
mams^m  asniyat  this  is  his  tow:  he  should  not  speak  the  nnfndh,  he  should 
not  eat  meat ;  na^_^enam  dadhikr§,va  can^  pavayam  kriyat  Badhikrdvan 
himself  could  not  make  him  pure  (MS.). 

h.  In  dependent  clauses  the  opt.  is  used  with  relatives 
(pronominal  or  adverbial) : 

a.  such  a  clause  having  a  determining  sense,  usually 
precedes.  This  type  is  very  rare  in  V.  ;  e.  g.  suryam  yo 
brahma  vidyat,  sa  id  vadhuyam  arhati  a  priest  ivho  shoidd 
Jcnotv  Surya  deserves  the  bridal  garment  (x.  85^^). 

In  B.,  on  the  other  hand,  clauses  of  this  type,  which  always  imply 
a  supposition,  are  very  common.  The  oj)t.  here  expresses  a  precept 
or  a  potential  sense  ;  the  principal  clause  most  olten  has  the  opt. 
also  ;  e.  g.  y^m  dvisyat,  tdm  dhyayet  whotn  he  may  hate,  he  should  think 
o/(TS.) ;  yo  va  imd.m  ald,bheta,  miieyeta^asmat  papmanah  7te  icho  were 
to  offer  litis  (bull),  ivould  be  delivered  from  this  sin  {'IS.).  In  the  principal 
clause  a  gerundive  occasionally  appears  or  the  verb  to  be  has  to  be 


21CJ  OPTATIVE  363 

supplied;  e.g.  yo  rastrad  dpabhutah  syat  tdsmai  hotavya  this  should 
he  offered  for  him  irho  should  be  deprived  of  his  kingdom  (TS.)  ;  yasya^agnayo 
gramyena^agnina  samdahyeran,  ka  tatra  prayascittih  if  any  one'' s  fires 
should  he  uniled  with  a  village  fa  c,  what  expiation  (is")  there''  (AB.). 

/?.  the  relative  clause,  if  it  has  a  final  or  consequential 
sense  {in  order  that,  so  that)  follows.  The  j^rincipal  clause 
contains  an  impv.,  a  subj.,  or  an  opt.  ;  e.g.  revatir  nah 
sadhamada  indre  santu  yabhir  madema  (i.  30")  let  our  feasts 
beside  Indra  he  rich  {by  which  — )  that  we  may  rejoice  (in  them) ; 
dhasatho  rayim  y^na  samatsu  sahisimahi  bestow  wealth  on 
us  {by  which  —)  that  we  may  be  victorious  in  battles  (viii.  40'); 
yaya^ati  visva  durita  tarema  sutarmanam  adhi  navam 
ruhema  we  would  ascend  the  rescuing  ship  {by  which  — )  that  ice 
may  cross  over  all  misfortunes  (viii.  42^). 

In  B.  final  reLitivo  clauses  with  the  optative  are  rare. 

y.  with  relative  conjunctions  : 

1.  jadif:  in  the  antecedent  clause  of  pres.  conditional 
periods,  the  condition  being  generally  regarded  as  unful- 
filled. The  apodosis  normally  contains  a  potential  opt. 
(though  isolated  examples  of  the  impv.,  inj.,  and  ind.  occur); 
e.  g.  yad  agne  syam  aham  tvam,  tvam  va  gha  sya  aham, 
syxis  te  satya  iha^asisah  if  I,  0  Agni,  were  thou,  and  thou 
wert  I,  thy  prayers  would  be  fulfilled  (viii.  44^3);  occasionally 
the  fulfilment  of  the  condition  is  expected  ;  e.  g.  yac  chu- 
sruya  imam  havam  durmarsam  cakriya  uta,  bhaver  apir 
no  antamah  if  thou  shouldst  hear  this  call  and  shouldst  not 
forget  it,  thou  wouldst  be  our  most  intimate  friend  (viii.  45^^). 
The  temporal  sense  of  when  with  the  opt.  seems  to  occur 
only  once  in  the  RV.  (iii.  33"). 

In  B.  (as  in  V.)  yd,d  z/with  the  opt.  is  very  common  in  the  protasis, 
Avhen  the  fulfilment  of  the  condition  is  not  expected  (yadi  with  opt. 
being  used  when  it  is  expected);  e.g.  sa  ydd  bhidyeta^artim  arched 
yajamanah  if  it  should  be  broken,  the  sacrificer  ivouldfall  into  calamity  (TS,). 
The  infinitive  with  isvar^  may  take  the  place  of  the  opt.  in  the  prin- 
cipal clause;  e.g.  yad  etara  samsed  Isvarah  parjanyo 'varstoh  if  he 
icere  to  repeat  this  {formula),  Parjamja  might  not  rain  (AB.).    Sometimes  the 


364  OUTLINES  OF  SYNTAX  [216 

verb  (opt.  of  as  be)  is  omitted  in  the  apodosis.  The  opt.  witli  ydd  here 
rarely  expresses  a  purely  hypothetical  case  (that  is,  without  the  im- 
plication that  the  condition  will  not  be  fulfilled);  e.g.  y^n  mam 
pravis6h  kfm  ma  bhuiijyah  (TS.)  if  you  were  to  enter  me,ofivhat  use  would 
you  he  to  me?  (afterwards  he  does  enter  Indra). 

a.  yad  with  the  opt.  in  the  final  sense  of  in  order  that  is 
very  rare  ;  e.g.  yan  nunam  asyam  gatim,  mitrasyayayam 
patha  in  order  that  I  might  noir  obtain  a  refuge,  I  iroukl  go  on 
the  path  of  Kitra  (v.  64-'). 

/3.  In  B.  ydd  with  the  opt  in  the  sense  of  Ihat  is  frequently  used 
after  dva  kalpate  is  suitable,  ut  sahate  endures,  ichdti  desires,  veda 
knows,  yukto  bhavati  is  intent,  in  posterior  clauses  ;  e.  g.  nd.  hi  tdd 
avakfilpate  yM  bruyat/or  it  is  nof  ftting  that  he  should  say  (SB.) ;  nd  va 
ahdm  iddm  ut  sahe  yd.d  vo  hota  syam  (SB.)  I  cannot  endure  this  that 
should  he  {  =  I  cannot  be)  your  Hotr;  tad  dhy  eva  brahmanena^_^estdvyam 
y&d  brahraavarcasi  syat/o?-  that  is  to  he  aimed  at  by  the  Brahmin,  thai  he 
should  he  pious  (SB.);  svayd.m  va  etdsmai  deva  yukta  bhavanti  ydt 
sadhu  vddeyuh  for  the  gods  themselves  are  intent  on  this,  that  they  should  say 
what  is  right  (SB.);  kd.s  tdd  veda  ydd  vrataprado  vratam  upotsiiicet 
for  ivho  knoics  (this  that  =)  whether  he  who  Jiands  the  fast-milk  (should  add  —  ) 
adds  (fresh  milk)  to  it  (SB.).  In  the  SB.  isvard  also  is  used  with  this 
construction  (in  other  Brahmanas  with  the  infinitive  only)  to  express 
a  possible  consequence  (though  the  yad  is  nearly  always  omitted) ; 
e.  g.  pdran  asmad  yajno  'bhCid  iti^isvard  ha  yat  tdtha^eva  syat  the 
sacrifice  has  turned  away  from  him  :  it  is  possible  that  this  should  he  so  (SB.). 
Otherwise  the  phrase  regularly  appears  in  the  form  of  iti^^isvaro  ha 
tatha  eva  syat,  perhaps  because  isvar^  came  to  be  regarded  as  a  kind 
of  adverb  =  possibly  this  might  be  so. 

7.  In  B.  yad  introducing  a  clause  with  the  opt.  accompanied  by  na 
and  ending  with  iti,  dependent  on  a  verb  of  fearing  or  similar  expres- 
sion, is  equivalent  to  lest  ;  e.g.  deva  ha  vai  bibhay§,m  cakrur  yd,d  vd,i 
nah  .  .  asuraraksasani,_^imd.m  graham  na  hanyur  iti  the  gods  feared 
lest  the  Asuras  and  Raksases  should  destroy  this  draught  (SB.);  indro  ha  va 
iksam  cakre  yd.n  ma  tdn  nd^abhibhdved  iti  Indra  pondered  (fearing) 
lest  that  should  vanquish  him  (SB.). 

2.  yadi  ?ywith  the  opt.  does  not  occur  in  the  RV.  and 

AV.  at  all,  and  only  once  in  the  SV. 

In  B.  it  is  very  common,  expressing  a  condition  the  fulfilment  of 
which  is  assvimed  (while  yd.d  with  opt.  implies  non-fulfilment  of  the 
condition).  The  clause  with  yddi  generally  precedes.  The  apodosis 
has  : 


216]  OPTATIVE  365 

a.  ustuilly  the  opt.,  which  expresses  a  precept  applicable  when  the 
condition  is  fulfilled  ;  e.  g.  yMi  pura  samsthanad  diryeta^adyd  var- 
sisyati^iti  briiyat  »/ (the  vessel)  should  be  hruken  before  the  completion  (of 
the  sacrifice),  he  should  say  :  it  will  rain  to-day  (MS.);  yadi  na  saknuyat 
so  'gnaye  purolasam  nir  vapet  if  he  should  not  be  able  to  do  so,  he  should 
offer  a  cuke  to  Arjni  (AB.).  The  pret-ept  occasionally  has  a  potential 
sense  ;  e.  g.  yddy  6katayisu  dvayisu  va^_^avagd,ched,  aparodhuka  enam 
syuh  (MS.)  if  he  (the  banished  man)  should  return  after  one  or  two  libations, 
tJieij  might  exclude  him  from  the  sovereignty  (but  not  if  he  returns  at  the 
conclusion  of  the  ceremony). 

/3.  isvar^  with  the  infinitive  ;  e.  g.  isvaro  ha  yady  apy  anyo 
yajeta^atha  hotaram  yaso  'rtoh.  eve7i  if  another  should  sacrifice  (instead 
of  him),  if  is  possible  tliatfame  should  come  to  the  Ilolr  (AB.). 

7.  a  gerundive  ;  sa  yadi  na  jayeta,  raksoghnyo  gayatryo  'niicyah 
if  it  (the  fire)  should  not  be  kindled,  the  demon-slaying  verses  are  to  be  repeated 
(AB.). 

S.  an  ind.  (sometimes  omitted  if  it  is  a  form  of  as  he); 
e.  g.  tasmad  yadi  yajna  rkta  artih  syad  brahmana  eva  ni 
vedayante  therefore  if  at  the  sacrifice  there  should  he  any  failure 
with  regard  to  a  Be  verse,  they  inform  the  Brahman  priest  (AB.); 
yadi  no  yajna  rkta  artih  syat,  ka  prayascittih  if  we  shall 
have  an  accident  at  the  sacrifice  in  regard  to  a  Be  verse,  what  (is) 
the  penance?  (AB.). 

e.  Tlie  difference  between  yad  and  yadi  with  the  opt. 
may  be  iUustrated  by  the  following  example  :  yan  no  jaye- 
yur  ima  abhyupa  dhavema,  yady  u  jayema^ima  abhyupa 
vartemahi^iti  if  they  were  to  conquer  us  (not  to  be  assumed), 
ive  shoidcl  take  refuge  with  these  (friends),  hut  (/"(as  is  to  be 
assumed)  tve  should  conqiier,  wc  could  again  hetake  ourselves  to 
them  (MS.). 

3.  yatha  used  in  V.  only  in  the  sense  of  in  order  that, 
generally  following  the  principal  clause,  which  contains  an 
imp  v.,  an  inj.,  or  an  ind. ;  e.  g.  apa  visvam  amitran  nudasva, 
yatha  tava  sarman  madema  drive  aicay  all  foes  that  tve  may 
rejoice  in  thy  protection  (x.  131');  tvaya  yatha  grtsamadaso 
.  .  liparam  abhi  syiih,  sliribhyo  grnat6  tad  vayo  dhah 
hestow  on  the  patrons  and  the  singer  this  hlessing  that  through 
tJiee  tlie  Gftsamadas  may  he  superior  to  their  ncighhours  (ii.  4^); 


366  OUTLINES  OF  SYNTAX  [2I6 

a  daivya  vrnimah6  'vamsi,  yatha  bhavema  milhuse  ana- 
gah  ive  implore  the  divine  aids  that  tve  may  he  sinless  before  the 
gracious  one  (vii.  97^). 

a.  In  B.  yatha  with  the  opt.  has  two  uses  :  n.  in  antecedent  clauses 
in  the  sense  of  as,  as  if,  with  a  correhative  meaning  so  in  the  principal 
clause,  which  contains  an  opt.,  an  ind.,  or  no  verli  ;  e.g.  yatha,^eva 
chinna  naur  bandhanat  plaveta,,_^evain  eva  te  plaveran  just  as  a  boat 
cut  from  its  fastening  would  drift,  so  theij  icould  drift  (AB.);  sd  yatha  nad- 
ydi  pardm  parapdsyed  evd.m  svd,sya^_^ayusah  pardm  pdra  cakhyau  as 
if  he  were  looking  across  to  the  farther  bank  of  a  river,  so  he  saw  the  end  of  his 
life  from  afar  (SB.)  ;  dtho  ydtha  bruyad  eti.n  me  gopaya^fti  tadfg  ev^ 
t^t  then  it  (is)  so  as  if  he  were  to  say  :  guard  this  for  me  (TS.). 

0.  in  posterior  clauses  in  the  sense  of  how,  so  that  ;  e.  g.  upa  janita 
ydtha^iyd,m  piinar  agachet  do  ye  find  out  how  she  could  come  back  (SB.)  ; 
tat  tdtha^evahotavy^m  yathaj^^agnim  vyaveyat  hence  it  is  to  be  so  poured 
that  it  may  divide  the  fire  (MS.). 

4.  yatra  and  yada  are  not  found  with  the  opt.  in  V.,  and 
yarhi  does  not  occur  at  all  in  the  RV.  and  AV. 

In  B.  all  three  conjunctions  are  used  hypothetically  with  the  opt.  in 
the  sense  of  when. 

a.  yd,tra,  besides  having  the  sense  of  when,  in,  case,  often  seems  to 
mean  at  the  moment  when,  as  soon  as  ;  the  jjrincipal  clause  has  the  opt.  or 
the  ind. :  e.  g.  marutdm  sapt^kapalam  nir  vaped  ydtra  vid  rajanam 
jijyaset  he  shoidd  offer  a  cake  on,  seven  dishes  to  the  Marids  in  case  the  people 
were  to  oppress  the  king  (MS.)  ;  sa  ydtra  prastuyat  tdd  etani  japet  as  soon 
as  he  (the  priest)  begins  to  sing,  one  should  mutter  the  following  prayers  (SB.). 

0.  yada  as  soon  as  seems  often  to  imply  that  the  action  of  the  opt. 
should  be  assumed  to  be  past ;  it  seems  always  to  be  followed  by  ^tha 
then  ;  e.  g.  si,  yada  samgramd.m  j£yed  dtha^aindragn^m  nir  vapet  as 
soon  as  he  may  have  won  a  battle,  he  should  sacrifice  to  Indra  and  Agni  (MS.). 

7.  ydrhi  when  is  generally  followed  by  the  coi-relative  td.rhi  then  in 
the  principal  clause,  which  usually  has  the  opt.  also  ;  e.  g.  ydrhi 
prajah  ksvidham  nigdcheyus,  tdrhi  navaratr^na  Y&^Qta  when  his  people 
should  be  exposed  to  hunger,  then  he  shmdd  sacrifice  with  the  rite  of  nine  nights 
(TS.). 

5.  ced  if  is  used  with  the  ind.  only  in  the  EV.  and  only 
once  with  the  opt.  in  the  AV. 

In  B.  it  is  used  with  the  0])t.  like  y^di  (with  which  it  may  inter- 
change) ;  e.  g.  etdrn  ced  any^sma  anubrSyas,  tata  evi,  te  siras  chind- 
yam  if  you,  were  to  communicate  tit  is  to  another,  I  would  cufoffyourfiead(SB.). 


217-218]  PRECATIVE,  CONDITIONAL     '  367 

Precative. 

217.  This  form,  which  occurs  in  the  RV.  and  AV.  in 
principal  clauses  only,  and  never  interrogatively,  expresses 
a  prayer  or  wish  addressed  to  the  gods  almost  exclusively,  as 
is  to  be  expected  from  the  nature  of  those  texts  ;  e.  g.  yo  no 
dv6sty  adharah  sas  padista  mai/  he  who  hates  us  fall  to  the 
ground  (iii.  53'-').  When  a  negative  is  used  it  is  na  ;  e.  g. 
bhago  me  agne  sakhy6  na  mrdhyah.  mai/  my  good  fortune , 
0  Agni,  not  relax  in  {thy)  friendship  (iii.  54^'). 

In  B.  the  precative  is  almost  restricted  to  verse  or  prose  formulas 
quoted  and  to  paraphrases  of  such  formulas  ;  e.  g.  bhuyasinam  utta- 
ram  sdmam  kriyasam  iti  gdvam  ld,ksma  kuryat  tcould  that  I  may  do 
(this)  to  more  next  year :  so  saying  he  should  make  the  mark  of  the  coivs  (MS.). 
satd.m  hima  iti  satam  varsani  jivyasam  ity  evdi^etdd  aha  by  the  expres- 
sion '  a  hundred  winters  '  he  says  this  :  '  voidd  that  I  may  live  a  hundred  years  ' 
(SB.).  It  is,  however,  sometimes  found  in  genuine  prose  narrative 
also ;  e.  g.  sa  ha  vak  prajapatim  uvaea :  ^havyavad  evd^ah&rn 
tubhyam  bhiiyasam  Vac  said  to  Prajdpati  :  I  irould  like  not  to  be  a  con- 
ductor of  sacrifice  for  thee  (SB.);  td.m  asapad :  dhiya-dhiya  tva  vadhya- 
suh  him  (Agni)  cursed  (saying)  :  /  loish  tliey  may  kill  thee  n-ith  repeated 
deliberation  (TS.). 

Conditional. 

218.  In  V.  the  conditional  occurs  only  once  (RV.  ii.  30^)  in 
a  somewhat  obscure  passage,  though  the  form  abharisyat 
used  after  a  past  tense  appears  to  mean  ivould  take  away 
(in  place  of  the  future  which  would  have  been  used  after 
a  present  tense). 

In  B.  the  conditional  is  once  found  in  a  simple  interrogative  sen- 
tence :  tata  evd^asya  bhayam  viyaya  :  kd,smad  dhy  d,bhesyat  there- 
upon his  fear  departed:  for  of  what  should  he  have  been  afraid"?  (SB.). 
Otherwise  it  occurs  only  in  compound  sentences: 

1.  usually  in  both  protasis  and  apodosis  of  conditional  sentences, 
expressing  what  might  have  happened  in  the  past,  but  did  not  happen 
because  the  condition  was  not  fulfilled.  The  conditional  clause  is 
generally  introduced  by  yad,  rareh'  by  yddi  (216) ;  e.  g.  sd,  y£d  dha^d.pi 
mukhad  ^drosyan,  na  ha^^evd.  prayascittir  abhavisyat  if  it  (Soma)  had 
also  flowed  out  of  his  mouth,  there  would  not  have  been  apenance  (SB.);  y£d  evdm 
n£^£vaksyo  murdha  te  vy  apatisyat  if  you  had  not  spoken  thus,  your 
head  irould  have  split  asunder  (SB.);  padau  te  'mlasyatam  y£di  ha  nd^_^ 
dgamisyah  your  feet  would  have  withered,  if  you  had  not  come  (SB.). 


368  OUTLINES  OF  SYNTAX  [218 

a.  When  yad  is  used  with  the  opt.  the  supposed  condition 
refers  to  the  present  (216). 

2.  in  relative  clauses  dependent  on  negative  principal 
clauses  containing  a  past  tense  (always  of  vid  fin(i) ;  e.  g.  sa 
tad  eva  na^avindat  prajapatir  yad  ahosyat  Frajfq^ufi 
found  nothing  that  he  could  sacrifice  (MS.);  sa  vai  tarn 
na^avindad  yasmai  tarn  daksinam  anesyat  he  found  no 
one  to  whom  he  should  give  this  sacrificial  fee  (TB.). 

3.  in  a  clause  introduced  by  yad  that  dependent  on  a 
negative  (or  equivalent)  clause  ;  e.  g.  ciram  tau  mene  yad 
vasah  paryadhasyata  he  thought  it  too  long  (that  =)  till  he 
should  put  on  the  garment  (SB.)  =:  he  thought  the  time  was  not 
short  enough  till  he  should  put  on  the  garment. 


APPENDIX   I 

LIST    OF    VERBS. 

The  order  of  the  parts  of  the  verb,  wlien  nil  are  give)),  is :  Present 
Indicative  (pk.),  Subjunctive  (sb.),   Injunctive  (in j.) .^Optative  (op.), 
I)nperative   (ipv.),    Participle   (pt.),    Impei-fect   (ipf.)  5^^  Perfect    (pf.)jj 
Pluperfect   (ppf.)0  Aorist    (ao-X?,  Precative    (pRC.)f^  Future    (ft.)]^' 
Conditional  (cc),  Passive  (ps.).  Present,  Aorist,  Past  Participle  (rP.)T 
Gerundive  (gdv.)[  Gerund  (gd.);   Infinitive  (inf.).;   Causative  (cs.) T 
Desiderative  (ds.)T  Intensive  (int.). 

T))e  Roman  numerals  indicate  the  conjugational  class  of  the  verb  ; 
P.  signifies  that  the  verb  is  conjugated  in  the  Pa)-asmaipada  (active) 
only,  A.  that  it  is  co))jugated  in  the  Atmanepada  (middle)  only. 

ams  attain,   V.  :   pr.   asnoti ;    sn.   asnavat ;    ipv.   asnotu ; 

PT.  asnuvant.     pf.  anamsa  and  anasa ;  anasma,  anasa, 

anasur ;    anas6 ;    sb.    anasamahai ;    op.    anasyam ;    pt. 

anasana ;    pf.   also  asa,    asatur,   asiir ;    A.   du.  asathe, 

asate.     ao.   root :    A.   3.   s.   asta,   pi.    asata ;    inj.   asta, 

pi.  asata;  op.  asyat,  prc.  3.  s.  asyas  (  =  asyas-t);    s:  sb. 

aksat ;  a  :  aset.     inf.  astave. 
aks  mutilate,  V.  :  pr.  ipv.  aksnuhi,      pf.  pt.  aksana.     ao. 

is  :  aksisur. 
ac  bend,  I. :  pr.  acati.     ipv.  2.  s.  aca ;  acasva.    ps.  acyate  ; 

pt.  acyamana  ;  ipf.  acyanta ;  pp.  akna  (B.).     gd.  -acya. 
aj  drive,   I. :    pr.   ajati,  ajate ;    sb.  ajani,  ajasi,  ajati ;    op. 

ajeta ;    ipv.   ajatu ;    pt.   ajant.     ipf.   ajat.     ps.    ajyate ; 

PT.  ajyamana.     inf.  -aje. 
anj  anoint,  VII. :  pr.  anakti,  ankt6  ;  sb.  anajat ;  ipv.  aiidhi 

(=r  angdhi),  anaktu;    pt.  anjant,    anjana.     ipf.  anjan. 

pf.  ananja ;    anaj6,  anajr6 ;    sb.    anaja ;    op.    anajyat ; 

PT.    anajana.       ps.    ajyate ;     pt.    ajyamana ;    pp.    akta. 

GD.  aktva  (B.),  -ajya  (B.). 

1819  B  b 


s 


870  APPENDIX    I 

ad  eat,  II.:    pr.  admi,  atsi,  atti;    adanti;    sb.   adat,   pi. 

adan  (AV.) ;  op.  adyat ;  ipv.  addhi,  attu  ;  attam,  attam  ; 

atta,  adantu ;  px.  adant,  adana.    ipf.  adat.    ft.  atsyati. 

pp.  anna  n.food.     gd.  attvaya  (B.).     inf.  attum,  attave, 

attos  (B.).     cs.  adayati  (B.). 
an  breathe,   P.:    I.  anati  (AV.) ;    VI.:    anati  (AV.);    II.: 

aniti ;    ipv.    anihi ;    pt.    anant.      ipf.    anit.      pf.    ana. 

Ao.  anisur.    ft.  anisyati  (B.).    pp.  anita(B.).    -anya(B.). 

INF.  anitum  (B.).     cs.  anayati. 
am  injure,  II. :  pr.  amisi,  amiti  ;  I. :  pr.  ame  ;  inj.  anaanta ; 

IPV.  amisva ;  pt.  amamaria.    ipf.  amit.    pf.  ainir6  (B.). 

AO.  amamat.     ps.  amyate.     cs.  amayati. 
arc  praise,  I. :  pr.  arcati ;  sb.  area,  arcat ;  arcama,  arcan  ; 

INJ.  arcat ;  arcan ;  ipv.  arcatu ;  pt.  arcant.    ipf.  arcan. 

PF.  anrciir ;    anrc6,     ps.  rcyate ;    pt.    rcyamana.     inf. 

rcase.     cs.  arcayati. 
arh  deserve,  I.  :    pr.   arhati ;    sb.  arhat ;    pt.   arhant.     pf. 

anrhiir  (TS.) ;  arhir6.     inf.  arhase. 
a,\  favour,  I.  P.  :  pr.  avati;  sb.  avat;  inj.  avat;  op.  avet; 

ipv.  avatu ;    pt.    avant.     ipf.    avat.     pf.    avitha,    ava. 

Ao.  root:  op.  2.  avyas;  prc.  3.  avyas  (==avyas-t);  is:  avit; 

SB.   avisat ;    inj.  avit ;    ipv.   aviddhi,  avistu ;    avistam, 

avistam. ;    avistana.     ft.    avisyati ;    pt.    avisyant.     pp. 

-uta.     GD.  -avya.     inf.  avitave. 
as   eat,    IX. :   pr.    asnati,   asnanti ;    asnit6,    asnate ;    op. 

asniyat ;   ipv.  asana ;   pt.   asnant.     ipf.  asnam,  asnat ; 

asnan,   asnan.     pf.    asa.      ao.   is :    asisam,    asis,    asit ; 

inj.    asit.       ft.    asisyati    (B.).      ps.    asyate ;    pp.    asita. 

GD.    asitva    (B.),    -asya    (B.).      cs.    asayati    (B.).      ds. 

asisisati  (B.). 
1.  as  he,  11.  P.:  pr.  asmi,  asi,  asti;   sthas,  stas ;   smas, 

stha  and  sthana,  santi ;  sb.  asani,  asasi  and  asas,  asati 

and  asat ;    asathas ;    asama,  asatha,  asan ;    inj.  3.  pi. 

san ;  op.  syam,  syas,  syat;   syatam,  syatam ;   syama, 

syata  and  syatana,  syiir ;  ipv.  edhi,  astu  ;  stam,  stam  ; 

sta,  santu ;  pt.  sant.     ipf.  asam,  asis,  as  (  =  as-t)  and 


LIST   OF   VERBS  371 

asit ;  astam,  astam ;   asau.    pp.  asa,  asitha,  asa ;    asa- 

thur,  asatur  ;  asima,  asur. 
2.  as  throw,  IV. :  pb.  asyami,  asyati  and  asyate  ;  asyamasi, 

asyanti ;  ipv.   asya  and   asyatat,   asyatu ;    pt.   asyant. 

iPF.  asyat.    pf.  asa.    ft.  asisyati.    ps.  asyate ;  pp.  asta. 

GD.  -asya.     inf.  astave,  astavai  (B.). 
ah  saij,  P.  :  pf,  aha,  attha  (B.) ;  ahatur  (B.) ;  ahiir. 
ap  obtain,   V.:  pr,   apnoti.     pf.   apa,  apitha;   apir6 ;   pt. 

apana.     ao.  red.:  apipan  (B.) ;    a:   apat;   op.  ap6yam 
.(AV.).     FT.  apsyati,  -te  (B.) ;  apta  (B.).     ps.  apyate  (B.) ; 

AO.   api  (B.) ;  pp.  apta.    gd.  aptva  (B.),  -apya  (B.).     inf. 

aptum  (B.).     cs.   apayati  (B.).     ds.  ipsati,  ipsate  (B.) ; 

AO.  aipsit  (B.) ;  ds.  of  cs.  apipayiset  (B.). 
as  sit,  II.  A. :  pr.  aste ;    asathe,   asate ;    asmahe,   asate ; 

SB.  asate ;  opt.  asita  ;  ipv.  s.  3.  astam,  pi.  2.  adhvam ; 

PT.  asana  and  asina.     iff.  pi.  3.  asata.     pf.  asam  cakre 

(B,).     Ao.  asista  (B.).     ft.    asisyati,  -te  (B.).     pp.  asita 

(B.j.    GD.  asitva  (B.).    inf.  asitum  (B.).    cs.  asayati  (B.). 
i  (JO,  II.  :  PR.  6ti;  yanti ;  A.  1.  s.  iye,  du.  3.  iyate,  pi.  1. 

imahe ;  sb.  aya,  ayasi  and  ayas,  ayati  and  ayat ;  ayama, 

ayan ;  inj.  pi.  3.  yan ;  op.  iyam,  iyat ;  iyama ;  ipv.  ihi, 

6tu ;  itam,  itam ;  ita  and  eta,  itana,  yantu ;  pt.  yant, 

iyana.    iff.  ayam,  ais,  ait ;  aitam,  aitam  ;  aita,  ayan ; 

A.  3.  pi.  ayata.      I. :    ayati,  ayate ;    inj.  ayanta ;   ipv. 

3.   du.   ayatam,    pi.    ayantam.     V.  :  pr.    inoti ;    invir6. 

IPF.  ainos,  ainot. 

PF.  iy^tha  and  iyatha,  iyaya;   iyathur,  iyatur;  iyiir; 

PT.   iyivams.     ppf.   aiyes.      ft.   esyati ;    ayisyati   (B.); 

eta  (B.).      pp.   ita.      gd.    itva,    -itya.     inf.   6tum   (B.) ; 

6tave,  6tavai,  ityai,  iyadhyai,  ayase ;  6tos. 
idh  kindle,  VII.  A.:   pr.  inddh6 ;    indhate  and  indhat6 ; 

SB.    inadhate;    ipv.    indham   (=inddham);    indhvam 

(=  inddhvam),  indhatam;    pt.  indhana.     iff.  aindha. 

PF.  idh6 ;    idhir6.     ao.  sb.  idhat6 ;    op.  idhimahi ;    pt. 

idhana.     ps.  idhyate ;  ipv.  idhyasva ;  pt.  idhyamana ; 

pp.  iddha.     inf.  -idham ;    -idhe.      From    the   nasalized 

Bb2 


372  APPENDIX  I 

root,  inda,  the  is  ao.  is  formed  in  B.  :  ind.  aindhista ; 
OP.  indhisiya. 
inv  go,  I.  P.  (  =  V.  i-nu  +  a) :  pr,  invasi,  invati ;  invathas, 
invatas.     sb.  invat ;    ipv.  inva,  invatu ;    invatam,  in- 
vatam;  pt.  invant. 

1.  is  desire,  VI.  :  pr.  ichati,  -t3  ;  sb.  ichat ;  inj.  ichas ; 
ichanta  ;  op.  ich6t ;  iehdta ;  ipv.  icha,  ichatu ;  ichata ; 
ichasva,  ichatam;  pt.  ichant;  Ichamana.  iff.  aichat. 
PF.  (B.)  iy6sa,  isiir ;  is6,  isir6.  ao.  (B.)  aisit;  aisfsur. 
FT.  (B.)  esisyati,  -te.  pp.  ista.  gd.  -isya.  inf.  dsturn 
(B.) ;  6stavai  (B.). 

2.  is  send,  IV. :  pr.  isyati,  -te ;  ipv.  isyatam ;  isyata ; 
PT.  isyant.  IX.  :  pr.  isnati ;  pt.  isnant ;  isnana.  VI. : 
PR.  is6  ;  INJ.  isanta ;  op.  is^ma ;  ipf.  aisanta.  pf.  isathur, 
isiir;  is6,  isir6.  pp.  isita.  gd.  -isya  (B.).  inf.  isadhyai. 
cs.  isayati,  -te ;  inf.  isayadhyai. 

iks  sec,    I.   A. :    pr.    ikse ;    pt.    iksamana.     ipf.    aiksata ; 

aiksetam ;  aiksanta.    per.  pf.  iksam  eakre  (B.).    ao.  is: 

aiksisi.     ft.  iksisyati,  -te  (B.).     pp.    iksita  (B.).     gdv, 

iksenya.     gd.  iksitva  (B.).     cs.  iksayati,  -te. 
inkh  swing :    cs.    inkhayati,    -te ;    sb.    inkhayatai   (AV.), 

inkhayavahai ;     ipv.    inkhaya ;     pt.    inkhayant.      pp. 

inkhita. 
id  2^^'<^ise,  II.  A. :  pr.  1.  ile,  3.  itte ;   ilate ;    sb.  ilamahai 

and  ilamahe ;   in.j.  ilata  (3.  pi.)  ;  or.  ilita;    ipv.  ilisva; 

PT.  liana,     pf.  il6  (3.  s.).     pp.  ilita.     gdv.  idya,  il6nya. 
ir  set  in  motion,  II.  :  pr.  irte  ;  irate;  ,sb.  irat ;  ipv.  irsva; 

iratham ;    irdhvam,    iratam ;    pt.    irana.     ipf.    airam, 

air-a-t,  du.  2.  air-a-tam ;  A.  airata  (3.  pi.),    pp.  irna  (B.). 

cs.  irayati;   sb.  irayamahe;  in.t.  irayanta;  ipv.  iraya, 

irayatam ;    irayasva ;   irayadhvam ;    pt.   irayant.     ipf. 

airayat ;  airayata  ;  inf.  irayadhyai.     pp.  irita. 
is  he  master,  II.  A.:  pr.  1.  ise,  2.  ikse  and  isise,  3.  iste, 

ise  and   (once)  isate ;    isathe;    ismahe,  isidhve,  isate ; 

inj.  isata  (3.  s.) ;  op.  isiya,  isita ;  pt.  isana.     pf.  isire ; 

PT.  isana. 


LIST   or   VERBS  373 

is  move,  I. :  pr.  isati,  -te ;  6sati ;  inj.  6sas ;  ipv.  isatu, 
6satu ;  PT.  6sant ;  isamana.     pf.  is6  (1.  3.).     pp.  -isita. 

1.  uks  simnldc,  VI.  :  pk.  uksati,  -te  ;  ipv.  uksatam,  uksata; 
uks6thara;  pt.  uksamana.  ao.  is:  auksisam  (B.).  ft. 
iiksisyati  (B.).  ps.  uksyate  (B.)  ;  pp.  uksita.  gd. 
-liksya. 

2.  uks  (=vaks)  groiv,  I.  and  VI. :  pr.  pt.  liksant ;  uksamana. 
iPF.  auksat.    ao.  s  :  auksis.    pp.  uksita.    cs.  uksayate. 

ue  he  pleased,  IV.  P. :  pr.  ucyasi.     pf.  uvocitha,  uvoca ; 

ucise,  iic6 ;  pt.  okivams,  ucus.     pp.  ucita. 
xid  wet,  VII.:  PR.  unatti;  undanti;  undate  (3.  pi.),     ipv. 

undhi  (  =  unddhi);    unatta;    pt.  undant.    VI.  P.:  pr. 

undati    (B.).      ipf.    aunat.      pf.    iidur.      ps.    iidyate ; 

pp.  utta  (B.).     GD.  -udya  (B.). 
ubj  force,  VI.  P. :  pr.  ubjati ;  ipv.  ubja,  ubjatu ;  ubjatam  ; 

ubjantu;    pt.  ubjant.      ipf.    2.  ubjas,    3.    aubjat.     pp. 

ubjita.     GD.  -ubjya  (B.). 
ubh  confine,  VII.  P.:    ipf.  unap  (2.  s.),    aumbhan  (TS.). 

VI.  P.:  IPV.  umbhata  (2.  pi.);  ipf.  aumbhat.    IX.  P.: 

IPF.  ubhnas,  aiibhnat.     pp.  ubdha. 
us  hum,  I.  P. :  pr.  osati ;    inj.  osas ;    ipv.  osa  and  6satat, 

osatu;   osatam;    pt.  osant.     IX.  P.:  pt,  usnant.     ipf. 

usnan.     pp.  uvosa  (B.).     ao.  ausit  (B.).     pp.  usta  (B.). 

1.  uh  remove,  I. :  pr.  uhati;  ipv.  uha.  ipf.  auhat;  auhata, 
auhau;  A.  auliata  (3.  s.).  ao.  auhit  (B.) ;  op.  uhyat 
(B.).  pp.  vidha  (B.).  gd.  -u.hya  and  -iihya  (B.).  inf. 
-iihitavai  (B.). 

2.  iih  consider,  I.  A. :  pr.  ohate.  II.  A.  :  pr.  ohate  (3.  pi.) ; 
PT.  ohana  and  ohana.  pf.  ixh.6;  2.  du.  iihyathe  {^iih- 
athe?).     AO.  auhista;  pt.  ohasana. 

r  go,  VI.  P.:  PR.  rchati  (-te,  B.) ;  sb.  rchat;  ipv.  rchatu; 
rehantu.  III.  P. :  pr.  iyarmi,  iyarsi,  iyarti ;  ipv. 
iyarta  (2.  pi.).  V.  :  pr.  rnomi,  rnoti ;  rnvanti ;  rnv6 ; 
rnvir6:  inj.  rnos ;  rnvan ;  A.  rnuta  (3.  s.) ;  sb.  rnavas; 
IPV.  :  A.  rnvatam  (3.  pi.) ;  pt.  rnvant.  ipf.  rnvan.  pf. 
aritha,  ara ;    arathur,  arur ;    pt.  arivams ;    arana.     ao. 


374  APPENDIX   I 

root:  arta;  arata ;  inj.  arta  (A.  3.  s.) ;  op.  aryat  (TS.); 

arita ;  pt,  arana ;  a  :  aram,  arat ;  arata,  aran ;  A.  arata 

(3.  s.);  aranta;  sb.  arama ;  inj.  aram;    aran;    A.   ara- 

mahi,  aranta ;  ipv.  aratam,  aratam.     ft.  arisyati  (B.). 

pp.   rta.      GD.    rtva,   -ftya.      cs.    arpayati ;     ao.    red. : 

arpipam  ;  pp.  arpita  and  arpita.    gd.  -arpya,  arpayitva 

(AV.).     INT.  alarsi,  alarti. 
rj   direct   VI. :    pr.   rnjati,  -te ;    ipv.   rnjata ;    pt.  rnjant. 

VII.   A.:    PR.   rnj6;    rnjate  (3.   pi.);    IV.:    pr.   rjyate ; 

pt.    rjyant.     I. :    pr.    arjati    (B.).       ao.    pt.    rnjasana. 

inf.  rnjase. 
rd  stir,  VI.  P.  :  ipv.  rdantu.     ipf.  ardan.     I.  :  pr.  ardati 

(AV.).     cs.  ardayati ;  sb.  ardayati. 
rdh  thrive,   V.  P.  :   pr.  rdhnoti ;    ipf.  ardhnot.     IV.  :  pr. 

rdhyati,  -te;    ipv.  rdhyatam.     VII.  P.:    sb.  rnadhat ; 

OP.  rndhyam  ;  pt.  rndhant.    pf.  anardha  (K.) ;  anrdhur  ; 

anrdh6.   ao.  root :  ardhma  (B.) ;  sb.  rdhat ;  A.  rdhathe 

(2.   du.) ;    OP.   rdhyam,    rdhyas,    rdhyama;    rdhimahi ; 

PRO.   rdhyasam ;    pt.   rdhant ;    a :  op.    rdh6t,   rdh^ma ; 

is:    ardhista  (B).     ft.    ardhisyate  (B.);    ardhita  (B.). 

PS.  rdhyate ;  ipv.  rdhyatam ;  pp.  rddha.    gdv.  ardhya. 

cs.  ardhayati.     ds.  irtsati ;  pt.  irtsant. 
rs  rush,  I. :    pr.  arsati,  -te ;    sb.  arsat ;    inj.  arsat ;    ipv. 

arsa,  arsatu ;  arsata,  arsantu;   pt.  arsant.    VI.  P.:  pr. 

rsati ;  pt.  rsant.     pp.  rsta. 
ej   stir,  I.  P. :  PR.    6jati ;    sb.    6jati  and  6jat ;    ipv.  6jatu ; 

pt.  6jant.     IPF.  aijat.     cs.  ejayati  (B.). 
edh  thrive,  I.  A. :  pr.  6dhate  (B.) ;  ipv.  6dhasva,  6dhatam 

(B.).    PER.  PF.  edham  cakrire  (B.).    ao.  is:  op.  edhisiya. 
kan,   ka  enjoi/,   IV. :    pr.   pt.   kayamana.     pf.   cak6 ;    sb. 

cakanas,    cakanat;    eakanama;    inj.    cakananta;    op. 

cakanyat ;     ipv.     cakandhi,    cakantu ;     pt.     cakana ; 

PPF.  cakan  (2.  s).     ao.  akanisam  ;  sb.  kanisas. 
kam  love:  pf.   pt.  cakamana.     ao.  red.:  aeikamata  (B.). 

FT.   kamisyate  (B.);    kamita  (B.).     cs.  kamayate ;    sb. 

kamayase ;  pt.  kamayamana. 


LIST   OF  VERBS  375 

kas  appear,  I.:  pr.  kasate  (B.).  int.  cakasimi,  cakasiti ; 
cakasyate  (B.) ;  sb.  cakasan  (AV.) ;  pt.  cakasat.  ipf. 
acakasam.     cs.  kasayati. 

kup  he  angn/,  TV. :  pr.  pt.  kupyant.  pp.  kupita.  cs. 
kopayati. 

1.  kr  tiiaJic.  V. :  pr.  krndmi,  krndsi,  krnoti ;  krnuthas,  kr- 
nutas  :  krnmasi,  krnutha,  krnvanti ;  A.  krnv6,  krnus6, 
krnut6  ;  krnmahe,  krnvate  ;  in.t.  krnvata  (3.  pi.) ;  sb. 
krnava,  krnavas,  krnavat ;  krnavava ;  krnavama, 
krnavatha  (VS.),  krnavan ;  A.  krnavai,  krnavase, 
krnavate ;  krnavavahai,  krnvaite  (for  krnavaite) ; 
krnavamahai,  krnavanta ;  op.  krnvita ;  ipv.  krnu, 
krnuhi    and    krnutat,    krnotu ;    krnutam,    krnutam : 

•      •  ••  7aa  7aa  ?•«  7 

krnuta,  krnota,  and  krnotana,  krnvantu :  A.  krnusva, 
krnutam ;  krnvatham  ;  krnudhvam ;  pt.  krnvant ; 
krnvana.  ipf.  krnavam,  akrnos,  akrnot ;  akrnutam  : 
akrnuta,  akrnota  and  akrnotana,  akrnvan ;  A.  akr- 
nuta  (3.  s.) ;  akrnudhvam,  akrnvata. 
VIII.  :  karomi,  karoti ;  kurmas,  kurvanti ;  kurv6,  ku- 
rut6;  kurvate;  sb.  karavas,  karavat;  ipv.  kurii,  kar6tu; 
A.  kurvatam.  pt.  kurvant ;  kurvana.  ipf.  akaros, 
akarot ;  akurvan ;  A.  kuruthas,  akuruta ;  akurvata. 
II. :  PR.  karsi ;  krthas ;  krtha ;  A.  krs6. 
PF.  cakara,  cakartha,  cakara ;  cakrathur,  cakratur ; 
cakrma,  cakra,  cakrur ;  A.  cakr6,  cakrs6,  cakr6 ;  ca- 
krathe,  cakrate  ;  cakrir6  ;  op.  cakriyas ;  pt.  eakrvams  ; 
eakrana.  ppf.  cakaram,  acakrat;  acakriran.  ao.  root: 
akaram,  akar,  akar ;  kartam,  akartam ;  akarma, 
akarta,  akran, ;  A.  akri,  akrthas,  akrta ;  akrata ;  inj. 
karam,  kar ;  sb.  karani,  karasi  and  karas,  karati  and 
karat ;  karathas,  karatas  ;  karama,  karanti  and  karan ; 
A.  karase,  karate ;  karamahe ;  op.  kriyama ;  pec. 
kriyasma ;  ipv.  krdhi ;  krtam  and  kartam ;  krta  and 
kartana;  A.  krsva ;  krdhvam;  pt.  krant;  krana. 
AO.  a :  akaras,  akarat ;  ipv.  kara ;  karatam,  karatam  ; 
s:  akarsit  (B.) ;  A.  akrsi  (B.).     ft.  karisyati;  -te  (B.) ; 


376  APPENDIX    I 

SB.  karisyas.     co.  akarisyat  (B.).     ps.  kriyate ;  pt.  kri- 

yamana ;    ao.    akari ;    pp.    krta.      gdv.    kartva.      gd. 

krtva,  krtvi,  krtvaya.    inf.  kartave,  kartavai  ;  kartos  ; 

kartum.      cs.   karayati,    karayate  (B.).      ds.  cikirsati. 

INT.  PT.  karikrat  and  carikrat. 
2.  kr  commemorate  :  ao.  s  :  akarsana  ;  is  :  akarisam,  akarit. 

INT.  carkarmi ;    sb.  carkiran ;    ao.  carkrse  (3.  s.) ;    gdv. 

carkrtya. 
krt  cut,  VI.   P.  :    pr.    krntati ;    inj.   krntat ;    ipv.  krnta ; 

PT.    krntant.     ipf.    akrntat.     pf.   cakartitha,   cakarta. 

AG.    a:    akrtas;    pt.  krtant;    red.:     aeikrtas    (B.).     ft. 

kartsyami.     ps.  krtyate  ;  pp.  krtta.     gd.  -krtya. 
krp  lament,  I.  A. :  pr.  krpate ;  pt.  krpamana.     ipf.  akrp- 

anta.    pf.  eakrpe  (K.).    ppf.  cakrpanta.    ao.  root:  akrp- 

ran ;  is  :  akrapista.     cs.  pt.  krpayant ;  ipf.  akrpayat. 
krs  he  lean,  IV.  P.  :    pr.  krsyati  (B.).     pf.  cakarsa.     pp. 

krsita  (B.).     cs.  karsayati. 
krs  plougli,   I.:   pr.   karsati ;    -te  (B.) ;    in.t.   karsat ;    ipv. 

karsa.    VI.  :  pr.  krsati ;  ipv.  krsatii ;  krsantu ;  A.  krs- 

asva;  pt.  krsant.    pf.  cakarsa  (B.).    ao.  red.  :  acikrsam  ; 

sa :  akrksat  (B.).     ft.   kraksy6  (B.).     ps.   krsyate  ;    pp. 

krsta.      GD.    krstva    (B.).       int.  3.    pi.    earkrsati;    sb. 

carkrsat ;  pt.  carkrsat ;  iff.  aearkrsur. 
kr  scatter,  VI.  P. :  pr.  kirati,  -te ;    sb.  kirasi ;    ipv.  kira, 

kiratu.     iff.  akirat.     ao,  is :   sb.  karisat.     ps.  kiryate 

(B.) ;  pp.  kirna  (B.). 
kip  he  adapted,  I. :  pr.  kalpate ;  ipv.  kalpasva ;    pt.  ka!p- 

amana.       iff.    akalpata,    akalpanta.        pf.    caklpur ; 

caklpr6.     AO.   red.  :   aciklpat ;    sb.  ciklpati.     ft.  kalp- 

syate   (B.).     pp.  klpta.     cs.  kalpayati;    sb.  kalpayati; 

kalpayavahai ;   ipv.  kalpaya,  kalpayatu  ;  kalpayasva ; 

PT.  kalpayant ;    ipf.  akalpayat.     ds.  cikalpayisati  (B.) ; 

GD.  kalpayitva. 
krand  cry  out,  I.  P. :    pr.  krandati ;    in.t.  krandat ;    ipv. 

kranda,    kraudatu ;     pt.    krandant.       jpf.  akrandas, 

krandat.       pf.     cakrade.      ppf.    cakradas,    eakradat. 


LIST   OF  VERBS  377 

Ao.  a :   iN.T.  kradas ;    red.  :    acikradas,  acikradat ;    aei- 

kradan ;  inj.  eikradas ;  s  :  akran  (2.  3.  s.).    cs.  krand- 

ayati.      int.    kanikranti    (3.    s.  =  kanikrant-ti) ;     pt. 

kanikradat. 
kram  stride,  I.  P. :  pr.  kramati ;  op.  kramema ;  ipv.  krama ; 

PT,  kramant ;  iff.  akramat ;  A. :  kramate ;   sb.  kram- 

ama ;    irv.   kramasva.      pf.   cakrama,  cakramur ;    ca- 

kram6 ;  cakramathe  ;    pt.  cakramana.     ppf.  cakram- 

anta ;    ao.  root :    akran  ;    akramur ;    inj.  kramur ;    a  : 

akramat,  akraman ;  s  :   A.  akramsta ;  akramsata ;  sb. 

kramsate ;    is :    akramisam    and    akramim,    akramis, 

akramit ;  kramista  (3.  s.) ;  inj.  kramis  ;  ipv.  kramistam. 

FT.  kramsyate;  kramisyati,  -te(B.);    pp.  kranta.     gd. 

krantva  (B.),  -kramya.     inf.  -krame;  kramitum  (B.) ; 

kramitos  (B.).     cs.  kramayati  (B.).     int.  ipv.  cankra- 

m-a-ta  (2.  pi.) ;  eankramyate  (B.). 
kri    buy,    IX.  :    pr.    krinati ;    krinit^ ;    sb.    krinavahai. 

iPF.  akrinan.     pt.  kresyati,  -te  (B.).     ps.  kriyate  (B.) ; 

pp.  krita.     gd.  kritva,  -kriya  (B.). 
krudh  he  angri/,  IV.  P. :  pr.  kriidhyati.   pf.  cukrodha  (B.). 

AO.  red. :  acukrudhat ;  sb.  eukrudhama ;  inj.  cukrudh- 

am  ;  a  :  inj.  krudhas.     pp.  kruddha.     cs.  krodliayati. 
krus  cry  out,  I. :  pr.  krosati ;  ipv.  krosatu ;  pt.  krosant ; 

krosamana.     ao.  sa :  akriiksat.     pp.  krusta  (B.). 
ksad  divide,   I.  A.  :    pr.   ksadamahe.      pf.    caksad6 ;    pt. 

eaksadana.     inf.  ksadase. 
ksam    endure,    I.   A.  :    op.    ksameta ;    ipv.    ksamadhvam. 

pt.    ksamamana.       pf.    caksam6    (B.) ;     op.    caksam- 

ithas. 
ksar  floiv,   I.  P.  :    pr.   ksarati ;    inj.  ksarat ;    ipv.   ksara ; 

ksarantu ;  pt.  ksarant.     ipf.  aksarat ;  aksaran.    ao.  s  : 

aksar.     pp.  ksarita  (B.).      inf.  ksaradhyai.     cs.  ksar- 

ayati  (B.). 
1,  ksi  possess,  II.  P.  :  pr.  ksdsi,  ks6ti ;  ksitas ;  ksiyanti ; 

SB.  ksayas,  ksayat;  ksayama;  pt.  ksiyant.    I.  P.  :  pr. 

ksayati;    op.   ksayema  (AV.) ;   pt.    ksayant.     IV.    P.: 


378  APPENDIX   I 

PR.  ksiyati;  or.  ksiyema ;  ipv.  ksiya.    ao.  s:  sb.  ks6sat. 

FT.  PT.  ksesyant.     cs.  ipv.  ksayaya ;  inj.  ksepayat. 
2.  ksi  destroy,   IX. :  pr.  ksinati ;    ksinanti ;    inj.  ksinam. 

iPF.  aksinas.     V.  :  pb.  ksinomi.    IV.  A.  :   pr.  ksiyate ; 

ksiyante.       ao.    s:    inj.    ksesta   (AV.).       Ps.   ksiyate; 

PT.  ksiyamana;  pp.  ksita  ;  ksina  (AV.).    gd.  -ksiya  (B.). 

INF.  -ksetos  (B.).     Ds.  eiksisati  (B.). 
ksip  throw,  VI.  P.  :  pr.  ksipati ;  inj.  ksipat ;  ipv.  ksipa; 

PT.   ksipant.     ao.   red. :    inj.    ciksipas ;     ciksipan.     pp. 

ksipta.     INF.  -kseptos  (B.). 
ksnu  wliet,  II. :  pr.  ksnaumi ;  pt.  ksnuvana.    pp.  ksnuta 

(B.).     GD.  -ksnutya  (B.). 
khan,  kha  dig,  I.  :  pr.  khanati ;  se.  khanama;  op.  khan- 

ema ;    pt.    khanant.      ipf.    akhanat ;    akhananta.     pf. 

cakhana ;  cakhniir.     fp.  pt.  khanisyant,     ps.  khayate 

(B.);  pp.  khata.    gd,  khatva  (B.) ;  khatvi  (TS.),  -khaya 

(B.).     inf.  khanitum. 
khad  clieiv,  I.  P.  :  pr.  khadati ;  ipv.  khada ;  pt.  khadant. 

PF.  cakhada.     pp.  khadita  (B.).     gd.  khaditva  (B.). 
khid  tear,   VI. :    pr.    khidati ;    inj.    khidat ;    op.    khid^t. 

IPV.  khida ;  khidant.     ipf.  akhidat.    pf.  pt.  khidvams. 

GD.  -khidya  (B.). 
khya  see :  pf.  cakhyathur.     ao.  a :  akhyat ;    inj.  khyat ; 

ipv.    khyatam ;      khyata.       ft.    khyasyati    (B.).       ps. 

khyayate(B.) ;  pp.  khyata.   gdv. -khyeya.   gd. -khyaya. 

inf.  khyatum  (B.)  ;  -khyai.     cs.  khyapayati,  -te  (B.). 
gam  go,   I.  :    pr.   gaehati,    -te ;    sb.    gachasi  and  gachas, 

gachati  and  gaehat;    gachatha,   gachan;    A.    gachai; 

op.  gachet ;  gachema ;  ipv.  gacha  and  gachatat,  gachatu 

and    gachatat ;    gachatam,    gachatam ;    gachata,    ga- 

chantu ;  A.  gaehasva  (AV.),  gachatam ;  gachadhvam  ; 

pt.  gachant ;    gachamana.      ipf.   agachat ;    agachanta. 

PF.  jagama,  jagantha,  jagama ;  jagmathur,  jagmatur; 

jaganma,  jagmxir ;  jagm6 ;  op.  jagamyam,  jagamyat ; 

jagamyatam,  jagamyur ;    pt.  jaganvams,  jagmivams ; 

jagmana.    Per.  pf.  gamayam  cakara  (AV.).    ppf.  ajagan 


LIST   OF   VERBS  379 

(2.  s.) ;  ajaganta  ;  A.  ajagmiran.  ao.  root:  agamam,  agan 
(2.  3.  s.) ;  aganma,  agman  ;  agathas,  agata ;  ganvahi ; 
aganmahi,  agmata  ;  sb.  gamani,  gamas,  gamat  ; 
gamathas,  gamatas ;  gamama,  gamanti ;  inj.  gan ; 
OP.  gainyas  ;  gmiya  (B.) ;  vuc.  3.  s.  gamyas ;  ipv. 
gadhi  and  gahi,  gantu ;  gatam  and  gantam,  gantam ; 
gata,  ganta  and  gantana,  gamantu ;  pt.  gmant ; 
a  :  agamat.  agaman  ;  sb.  gamatas  ;  gamatha ;  inj.  gam- 
an ;  gam^yam,  gamds,  gani6t ;  gamama  ;  gam6inahi ; 
red. :  ajigamam,  ajigamat;  s  :  agasmahi;  is:  gamistam; 
gmisiya  (VS.).  ft.  gamisyati  (AV.);  ganta  (B.).  ps. 
gamyate ;  ao.  agami ;  pp.  gata.  gd.  gatva,  gatvaya, 
gatvi,  -gatya.  inf.  gantave,  gantavai,  garaadhyai, 
gamadhye  (TS.);  gantos,  -gamas.  cs.  gamayati  and 
gamayati.  ds.  jigamsati ;  jigamisati,  -te  (B.).  int. 
ganiganti ;  pt.  ganigmat. 

1.  ga^o,  III.  P.:  PR.  jigasi,  jigati;  inj.  jigat;  ipv.  jigatam; 
jigata;  pt.  jigat.  ipf.  ajigat.  pf,  op.  jagayat.  ao.  root: 
agam,  agas,  agat ;  agatam,  agatam ;  agama,  agata, 
agur;  sb.  gani,  gas,  gat;  gama;  inj.  gam.;  gama,  giir; 
IPV.  gata  and  gatana;  s:  inj.  gesani(VS.) ;  gesma(AV.). 
DS.  jigasa  (SV.).     inf.  gatave. 

2.  ga  sing,  IV. :  pr.  gayasi,  gayati ;  gayanti ;  A,  gaye ; 
INJ.  gayat ;  ipv.  gaya ;  gayata,  gayantu ;  pt.  gayant. 
ipf.  agayat.  pf.  jagan  (B.).  ao.  s:  inj.  gasi  (1.  s.); 
sis:  agasisur;  sb.  gasisat.  ft.  gasyati  (B.}.  ps.  pt. 
giyamana ;  pp.  gita.  gd.  gitva  (B.) ;  -gaya  (B.)  and 
-giya  (B.).  inf.  gatum  (B.).  cs.  gapayati,  -te  (B.). 
DS.  jigasati  (B.). 

gah  i)lun(jc,  I.  A.:    pr.    gahase,    gahate;    op.  gahemahi; 

IPV.  gahetham;    pt.  gahamana.     ipf.  agahathas.     int. 

jangahe.  . 

gur   greet,    VI. :    pr.   ipv.   gurasva.     pf.   sb.  jugurat ;    op. 

juguryas,  juguryat.    ao.  root:  giirta  (3.  s.  A.),    pp.  gurta. 

GD.  -gurya. 
guh   liide,   I.:    pr.    guhati,    -te ;    inj.    guhas ;    guhathas ; 


380  APPENDIX   I 

ipv.  guhata ;  pt.  guhant ;  guhamana.  irr.  aguhat. 
AO.  a:  guhas ;  inj.  guhas;  pt.  guhant;  guhamana; 
sa:  aghuksat.  ps.guhyate;  pt.  guhyamana;  pp.  gudha; 
GDV.  guhya,  -gohya.     gd.  gudhvi.     ds.  juguksati. 

1.  gr  sing,  IX.  :  pr.  grnami,  grnati ;  grnitas ;  grnimasi, 
grnanti ;  A.  grn6,  grnis6,  grnit6  (and  grne),  grnimahe  ; 
INJ.  grnita  (3.  s.  A.) :  ipv.  grnihi,  grnatu ;  grnitam, 
grnitam ;  grnita,  grnantu ;  pt.  grnant ;  grnana.  gd. 
-girya  (B.).     inf.  grnisani. 

2.  gr  tvake:  ao.  red.:  2.  3.  ajigar;  ipv.  jigrtam;  jigrta. 
INT.  jagarti;  jagrati;  sb.  jagarasi  (AV.),  jagarat;  op. 
jagriyama(V8.),  jagryama(TS.);  ipv.jagrhi  andjagrtat; 
jagrtam,  jagrtam  ;  pt.  jagrat.  ipf.  ajagar.  pf.  1.  s.  ja- 
gara.  3.  jagara.  pt.  jagrvams ;  ft.  jagarisyati,  -te 
(B.) ;  pp.  jagarita  (B.).     cs.  jagarayati  (B.). 

grdh  he  greedy,  IV.  P. :  pr.  pt.  grdhyant.  pf.  jagrdhiir. 
AO.  a  :  agrdhat ;  inj.  grdhas  ;  grdhat. 

gr  S'waUow,  VI.  P. :  pr.  girati.  pf.  jagara.  ao.  root : 
SB.  garat,  garan;  red.:  ajigar  (2.  s.);  is:  inj.  garit. 
ft.  garisyati  (B.).  pp.  girna.  gd.  -girya  (AV.).  int. 
SB.  jalgulas ;  pt.  jargurana. 

grabh  seize,  IX. :    pr.  grbhnami,    grbhnati ;    grbhnanti 
grbhn6 ;  grbhnate ;  sb.  grbhnas ;  inj.  grbhnita  (3.  s.) 
IPV.  grbhnihi.     ipf.   agrbhnas,   agrbhnat ;    agrbhnan 
agrbhnata  (3.  pi.  A.),    pf.  jagrabha  (1.  s.) ;  jagrbhathur 
jagrbhma,  jagrbhiir ;    A.  jagrbhr^  and  jagrbhrire  ;    op. 
jagrbhyat ;     pt.   jagrbhvams ;     ppf.    ajagrabham,    aja- 
grabhit.   ao.  root :  agrabham ;  agrbhran ;  pt.  grbhana ; 
a:    agrbham;    red.:    ajigrabhat ;    is:    agrabhim  (TS.), 
agrabhit;  agrabhisma,  agrabhisur;  agrbhisata(3.  pi.  A.). 
inj.    grabhista   (2.    pi.),      pp.    grbhita.      gd.    grbhitva, 
-grbhya.     inf.  -grabhd,  -grbh6.     cs.  pt.  grbhayant. 

gras  devour,  I.  A. :  pr.  grasate ;  op.  grasetam.  pf.  op. 
jagrasita ;  pt.  jagrasana.     pp.  grasita. 

grah  seize,  IX.  :  grhnami,  grhnati ;  grhnanti ;  grhn6 ; 
grhnimahe,  grhnate ;  op.  grhniyat;  ipv.  grhnahi(AV.), 


LIST   OF   VERBS  381 

grhnitat  and  grhana ;  grhnatu ;  grhnitam  ;  grhnantu  ; 
PT.  grhnant;  grhnana.  iff.  agrhnat,  agrhnan.  rr. 
jagraha,  jagraha ;  jagrhma,  jagrhiir ;  jagrh6.  ao,  a: 
iNJ.  grhamahi ;  is  :  agrahifc ;  agrahista.  ft.  grahisyati 
(B.);  CO.  agrahTsyat  (B.),  agrahaisyat  (B.).  ps.  grhyate  ; 
pp.  grhita.     gd.  grhitva,  -grhya.     inf.  grahitavai  (B.). 

grahitos    (B.).       cs.   grahayati    (B.).      ds.    jighrksati, 

-te  (B.). 
ghas  cat:   pf.  jaghasa,  jaghasa;    op.  jaksiyat;    pt.  jaksi- 

vams  (AV.).     ao.  root :  aghas  (2.  3.  s.),  aghat  (3.  s.,  B.) ; 

aghastam    (3.   du.,  B.) ;    aghasta    (2.    p].,    B.),    aksan; 

SB.ghasas,  ghasat;  ipv.  ghastam  (3.du.);  s  :  aghas  (2.  s.); 

red. :  ajighasat.     pp.  -gdha  (TS.).     us.  jighatsati. 
ghus  sound,  I. :  pr.  ghosati,  gh6sate  ;  sb.  ghosat ;  gh6san ; 

PT.    ghosant.     pf.   jughosa   (B.).      ps.    ao.    ghosi.      gd. 

-ghusya.     cs.  ghosayati. 
caks  sec,   II.:    pk.  cakse   (=  caks-se),    caste;    caksathe; 

caksate;  P.  caksi  (=  caks-si) ;  iff.  caksur.    I.  A. :  pr. 

caksate  (3.  s.) ;    iff.  eaksata  (3.  s.).     pf.  cacaksa ;  ca- 

caks6  (B.).    PPF.  aeacaksam.    gdv.  caksya.    gd.  -caksya. 

INF.  -cakse,  caksase  ;   -caksi.     cs.  caksayati. 
car  move,  I.  P. :  pr.  carati ;  sb.  carani ;  carava,  caratas ; 

caran ;  caratai  (AV.) ;  inj.  carat ;  op.  caret ;   ipv.  cara, 

caratu ;    carata,    carantu;    pt.    carant.       iff.    acarat. 

PF.  caeara;  cerima,  ceriir.    ao.  red.  :  aeicarat ;  s:  acar- 

sam  (B.)  ;    is:    acarisam ;    inj.    cant.      ft.    carisyami. 

PS.  caryate  (B.) ;  pp.  earita ;  gdv.  -cardnya.    gd,  caritva 

(B.) ;    -carya  (B.).      inf.   carase,    caritave,   caradhyai ; 

caritavai  (B.) ;  caritum  (B,);  caritos  (B.).    cs.  carayati, 

-te(B.).    DS.  cicarsati(B.),  cicarisati(B.).    int.  carcariti; 

FT.  carcuryamana. 
cay  note,  I. :  pr.  cayati  (B.) ;  ft.  cayamana.    per.  pf.  -cayam 

cakrur    (B.).       ao.   is :    acayisam.      ps.    cayyate.      gd. 

cayitva ;  -cayya. 
1.  ci  gather,  V. :  pr.  cinoti ;  cinvanti ;   cinut6 ;   sb.  cinav- 

at ;    OP.  ciuuyama ;     ipv.    ciniihi,    cinotu ;    cinvantu ; 


882  APPENDIX   I 

cinusva;  vt.  cinvant;  cinvana.    I.  :  pk.  cayase,  cayate ; 

cayadhve  ;  inj.  cayat ;  op.  cayema.    pf.  cikaya ;  cikye  ; 

cikyird.      ao.    root:    acet ;    ipv.    citana,    ciyantu ;    s: 

acaisam   (B.) ;    is:    cayistam.      ft.    cesyati,    -te    (B.). 

PS.  ciyate(B.);  pp.  cita.    gd.  citva{B.).    inf.  cetuni(B.); 

cetavai  (B.).     ds.  cikisate  (B.). 
2.  ci  note.  III.  :  pr.  cik6si  (AV.) ;  ipv.  cikihi  (AV.),  eiketu 

(TS.) ;  A.  (3.  s.)  cikitam  (AV.);  pt.  eikyat.    iff,  aciket ; 

acikayur  (B.).     pf.  cikaya;  cikyatur;    cikyiir;    A.   2. 

du.    cik6the    (for  cikyathe).      ao.    root :   acet ;    A.   aci- 

dhvam.     pp.  cita.     ds.  cikisate. 
cit  perceive,  I. :  pr.  c6tati ;  c6tathas  ;  cdtatha  ;  A.  estate  ; 

c6tante ;    inj.   c6tat ;    ipv.   c^tatam ;    pt.    c6tant ;    iff. 

acetat.      II.   A.  :    pr.  cit6  (3.  s.).     pf.  ciketa ;  eikitur ; 

A.  cikit6 ;    cikitr6  and  cikitrir6 ;    sb.  cikitas,  ciketati 

and  ciketat ;  eiketathas  ;  ipv.  cikiddhi  ;  pt.  cikitvams  ; 

cikitana ;    ppf.   ciketam ;    aciketat.      ao.    root :    acet ; 

PT,  citana ;  ps.  :  aceti ;  s  :  acait.    inf.  citaye.  cs.  cetayati, 

-te  and  citayati,  -te;    sb.  cetayani,  cetayatai  (TS.) ;  op. 

citayema.    ds.  inj.  cikitsat.     int.  cekite  (3.  s.);  sb.  c6- 

kitat ;  pt.  c6kitat. 
cud  impel,  I. :  pr.  codami ;  codate ;  inj.  codat ;  ipv.  coda, 

codata ;    codasva,  codetham.       cs.  sb.  codayasi,  cod- 

ayat ;  codayase,  codayate ;  pp.  codita. 
cyu  fHove,  I.  :  pr.  cyavate ;  inj.  cyavam ;  cyavanta ;  ipv. 

cyavasva ;    cyavetham ;    cyavadhvam.      pf.   cicyuse, 

cucyuv6  (3.  s. );  iNJ.cucyavat ;  op.  cueyuvimahi,  cucyav- 

irata.      ppf.  acucyavat,  acucyavit ;  acucyavitana,  acu- 

cyavur.    ao.  s:  cyosthas.    ft.  cyosyate  (B.).    pp.  cy'uta. 

cs.  cyavayati,  -te. 
chad  or  chand   seem,  II. :    pr.  chantsi.      pf.    caehanda ; 

OP.  cachadyat.    ao.  s:  achan ;  achanta  (  =  acliant-s-ta), 

achantsur ;  sb.  chantsat.     cs.  chadayati ;  chandayase  ; 

INJ.    chadayat ;     sb.    chadayatha ;     chandayate ;    ipf. 

achadayan. 
chid  cut  ojf',  VII.  :  pr.  chinadmi,  chinatti ;    ipv.  ehindhi 


LIST   OF   VERBS  383 

( :^  chiuddhi),  chinattu;  chintam  (  =  chinttam),     pf.  ci- 

ch6da;  cichid6  (B.).     ao.  root:    chedma;  a:  achidat; 

achidan ;  s :  achaitsit  (B.) ;  inj.  chitthas.    ft.  chetsyati, 

-te  (B.).     PS.  chidyate ;    pt.  chidyamana ;    ao.  achedi; 

pp.  chinna.     gd.  -ehidya;  chittva  (B.).     inf.  ch^ttavai 

(B.) ;  ch6ttum  (B.).     ds.  cichitsati,  -te  (B.). 
jan  generate,  I.:    pr.  janati;    sb.  janat;    inj.  janat;    ipv. 

janatu;    pt.  janant;   janamana.      ipf.   ajanat;    Janata 

(3.  s.);    ajananta.      pf.   jajana;    jajnatur;   jajnur   and 

jajanur;    A.  jajnis6,  jajn6;  jajnir6 ;    pt.  jajnana.     ao. 

root :  ajani  (1.  s.) ;  red.  :  ajijanat,  ajijanan  ;  inj.  jijanam  ; 

jijananta ;  is  :  janistam  (8.  du.) ;  A.  ajanisthas,  ajanista ; 

OP.  janisiya,  janisista.     ft.  janisyati,  -te ;  janita  (B.) ; 

CO.  ajanisyata  (B.).      ps.  :  ao.  ajani;  jani,  jani.      gdv. 

jantva  and  janitva.    gd.  janitvi.     inf.  janitos.    cs.  jan- 

ayati,    -te ;    sb.  janayas ;    op.   janayes ;    ipv.   janaya, 

janayatu ;  janayatam  ;  janayata.     ds.  jijanisate  (B.). 
jambh   chetv :    ao.    red.  :    ajijabham ;    is :    sb.    jambhisat. 

pp.   jabdha.     cs. :  ipv.  jambhaya ;    jambhayatam ;    pt. 

jambhayant.     int.  jaiijabhyate  (B.) ;   pt.  janjabhana.  . 
jas  he  exhausted,  I.  :  pr.  pt.  jasamana ;   IV. :  ipv.  jasyata. 

PF.  jajasa ;  ipv.  jajastam.     ao.  red.  :  ajijasata  (3.  s.,  B.). 

cs.  jasayati  (B.). 
ja  he  horn,  IV.  A. :  pr.  jayate ;  inj.  jayata ;  op.  jayemahi ; 

IPV.  jayasva,  jayatam ;     jayadhvam ;      pt.  jayamana. 

IPF.  ajayathas,  ajayata  ;  ajayanta.     pp.  jata. 
1.  ji  conquer,   I. :   jayati,  -te ;    sb.  jayasi,   jayas,   jayati ; 

jayava,  jayatha;    A.   jayatai   (AV.);    inj.   jayat;    op. 

jayema;    ipv.  jayatu;  A.  jayantam ;    pt.  jayant.     ipf. 

ajayat.    II.  P. :  pk.  j6si.   pf.  jig^tha,  jigaya  ;  jigyathur ; 

jigyiir ;  A.  jigy6  ;  pf.  jigivams  ;  jigivams  (B.) ;  ao.  root : 

INJ.  j6s;    ipv.  jitam;    s:  ajai.sam,   3.   ajais   (=ajais-t); 

ajaisma;    sb.  j6sas,  j6sat;   j^sama;    inj.  j6sam  (VS.), 

j6s;    j6snia,  jaisur  (AV.).      ft.   jesyati;    pt.   jesyant. 

pp.  jita;    gdv.  j6tva.     gd.  jitva  (B.)  ;  -jitya.     inf.  jis6 ; 

j6tave  (B.) ;  j6tum  (B.).      cs.  japayati  (B.) ;    ajijapata 


384  APPENDIX   I 

(VS.)  and  ajijipata  (TS,).  ds.  jigisati,  -te;  pt.  jigi- 
sainana. 

2.  ji  quicken,  V.  :  pr.  jinosi;  jinve.     ipf.  ajinot  (B.). 

jinv  quicken  (=V.  ji-nu  +  a),  I.  :  pr.  jinvasi,  jinvati ;  jinva- 
thas  ;  jinvatha,  jinvanti ;  A.  jinvate ;  ipv.  jinva,  jinv- 
atu;  jinvatam  ;  jinvata;  pt.  jinvant.  ipf.  ajinvat;  ajinv- 
atam.     pp.  jijinvathur.     ft.  jinvisyati  (B.).     pp.  jinvita. 

jiv  live,  I.  P.  :  pr.  jivati ;  sb.  jivani,  jivas,  jivati  and  jivat ; 

J-  J.  ±  lit 

jivatha,  jivan  ;  op.  jivema ;   ipv.  jiva,  jivatu ;  jivatam  ; 

jivata,  jivantu;  pt.  jivant.     pf.  jijiva  (B.).     ao.   root: 

PRC.  jivyasam;    is:  inj.  jivit.     ft.   jivisyati    (B.).     ps. 

jivyate  (B.) ;    pp.    jivita.      gdv.   jivaniya.      gd.   jivitva 

(B.).     inf.  jivase;  jivitavai,  jivatave  (ts.  vs.);  jivitum 

(B,).     cs.  jivayati.     ds.  jijivisati   (B.) ;   jujyusati  (B.) ; 

pp.  jijyusita  (B.). 
jus   cnjoij,   VI. :    PR.   jusate ;    op.   jus6ta ;    jus^rata ;    pt. 

jusamana ;    ipf.  ajusat ;    ajusata.     pf.  jujosa ;    jujusd ; 

SB.  jujosati,  jujosat;   jiijosatha,  jujosan;    A.  jujosate; 

IPV.  jujustana ;  pt.  jujusvams  ;  jujusana.    ppf.  ajujosam. 

AO.   root:    ajusran ;    sb.   josati,   josat;    A.  josase;    pt. 

jusana ;    is  :  sb.  josisat.      pp.  justa  gladdened  and  justa 

welcome,     gd.  justvi.     cs.  josayate  ;  sb.  josayase. 
JVL  speed,  iX.  P.  :  pr.  junati;  junanti ;  SB.junas.     I.  A. :  pr. 

javate.     pf.  jujuvur;    sb.  jujuvat  (  =  jujavat);   pt.  ju- 

juvams ;  jujuvana.     pp.  juta.     inf.  javase. 
jurv  consume,  I.  P. :  pr.  jurvati ;   sb.  jurvas ;  ipv.  jurva ; 

PT.  jiirvant.     ao.  is  :  jurvit. 
jr  sing,   1.  A,:    pr.  jarate ;    sb.   jarate;    op.  jareta;    ipv. 

jarasva,  jaratam  ;  pt.  jaramana.     inf.  jaradhyai. 
jr,  jur  tvastc  aivay,  I.  P. :    pr.  jarati ;    ipv.  jaratam ;    pt. 

jarant.    VI.  P.  :  pt.  jurant.    IV.  P.  :  pr.  jiryati,  juryati ; 

pt.  juryant;   ipf.  ajuryan.    pf.  jajara;    pt.  jujurvams. 

AO.   is  :   jarisur.      pp.  jirna,  jurna.      cs.  jarayati,  -te ; 

PT.  jarayant  and  jarayant. 
jna    TxHoic,  IX.  :   pr.    janati ;    janimas,  janitha,  jananti ; 

janit6  ;  janate ;   sb.  janama ;  janamahai ;  op.  janithas ; 


LIST   OF   VEEBS  385 

ipv.  janihi,  janitat,  janatu;  janita,  janantu;  janidhvam, 

janatam;    pt.  janant ;   janana.     ipf.    ajanam,    ajanat; 

ajanan;    A.    3.   pi.   ajanata.      pf.   jajnaii;    jajne;    pt. 

jajnivams   and  janivams.     ao.    root :    op.   jneyas   (Gk. 

yrot'7/y) ;    s:    ajnasam   (B.);     ajnasthas ;    in.t.  jnesam ; 

sis:    ajnasisam.      ft.    jnasyati,    -te    (B.) ;    jnata    (B.). 

PS.  jnayate ;    ao.   ajnayi;    pp.  jnata;    gdv.  jneya  (B.). 

GD.  jnatva  (B.),  -jnaya  (B.).    inf.  jnatum  (B.),  jfiatos  (B.). 

cs.  jnapayati;    ao.  ajijnipat  (TS.);    ps.  jnapyate  (B.) ; 

pp.  jnapta  (B.) ;  jnapayati  (B.).     ds.  jijnasate. 
jya  overpoiver,  IX. :   pr.  jinati ;    op.   jiniyat ;    pt.  jinant. 

IV.  A. :  PR.  jiyate.     pf.  jijyaii  (B.).     ao.  sis  :  ajyasisam 

(B.).     FT.  jyasyati,  -te  (B.).      ps.  jiyate;  pp.  jita.      ds. 

jijyasati. 
jval /rtwe,  I.  P.:  pr.  jvalati  (B.).      pf.  jajvala  (B.).     ao. 

ajvalit  (B.).     ft.  jvalisyati  (B.).     pp.  jvalita  (B.).     cs. 

jvalayati  (B.). 
tams  sJiaJce  :  pf.  tatasrd.    ppf.  atatamsatam.    ao.  a :  atasat. 

cs.  tamsayati, -te ;   inf.  tamsayadhyai.    int.  sb.  tantas- 

aite ;  gdv.  -tantasayya. 
taks  fashion,  I.  P. :  pr.  taksati ;  sb.  taksama ;  in.t.  taksat ; 

IPV.  taksatam ;    taksata,  taksantu ;    pt.   taksant.     ipf. 

ataksat.    II. P.:  pr.  tasti(B.),  taksati  (8.  pi.) ;  ipv.  talhi. 

IPF.  ataksma,  atasta.    V.  P. :  pr.  taksnuvanti  (B.).     pf, 

tataksa  (taksathur,  taksiir) ;  tatakse.    ao.  is  :  ataksisnr. 

pp.  tasta. 
tan  stretch,  VIII. :  pr.  tanoti ;  tanmasi,  tanvanti ;  tanut^  ; 

SB.    tanavavahai;    int.    tanuthas;    ipv.   tanii,    tanuhi, 

tanotu;  A.  tanusva;  tanudhvam;  pt. tanvant;  tanvana. 

ipf.    atanuta ;    atanvata.      pf.    tatantha,    tatana    and 

tatana;  A.  1.  tatand,  3.  tatn6  and  tat6  (\/ta);  tatnire 

and  tenlre ;  sb.  tatanat ;  tatanama,  tatanan ;  inj.  tatan- 

anta ;    op.  tatanyiir ;    pt.  tatanvams.     ao.  root :  atan ; 

A.  2.  atathas,    3.  atata;    atnata  (3.  pi.);     a:  atanat; 

in.t.  tanat;    s:    atan  and  atamsit;    atasi  (B.) ;  atams- 

mahi(B.);  is:  atanit.     ft.  tamsyate  (B.).     ps.  tayate ; 

1819  C  C 


386  APPENDIX   I 

Ao.  atayi  (B.).     pp.  tata.     gd,  tatva  (B.),  tatvaya  (VS.), 

-tatya  (B.).     inf.  tantum  (B.). 
tap  heat,  I. :  pe.  tapati,  -te ;    sb.  tapati ;    inj.  tapat ;    ipv. 

tapatu ;  PT.  tapant.    ipf.  atapat.    IV.  P.  :pr.  tapyati(B.). 

PF.  1.  tatapa.   3.  tatapa;  tep6;  sb.  tatapate;  pt.  tepana. 

AO.  root :  PT.  tapana ;  red. :  atitipe  (3.  s.) ;  sb.  titipasi ; 

s :  atapsit ;  atapthas  ;  inj.  tapsit ;  taptam.  ft.  tapsyati 

(B.).    PS.  tapyate ;  ao.  atapi ;  pp.  tapta.    gd.  taptva  (B.), 

-tapya.     inf.  taptos  (B.).     cs.  tapayati,  -te  (AV.) ;  ps. 

tapyate  (B.). 
toxa  faint,  IV.  P. :  pr.  tamyati  (B.).    pf.  tatama  (B.).  ao.  a  : 

INJ.  tamat.     pp.  tanta  (B.).      inf.  tamitos  (B.).     tam- 

ayati  (B.). 
tij  le  sharp,  I.  A. :  pr.  t6jate ;  pt.  t^jamana.    pf.  ipv.  titig- 

dhi  (B.).     pp.  tikta.     ds.  titiksate.     int.  tdtikte. 
tu  he  strong,  II.  P. :    pr.  taviti.     pf.  tutava.     ppf.  tutos, 

tutot.     INT.  PT.  tavitvat  (=  tavituat). 
tuj  urge,  VII. :  pr.  tunjanti;  tunjate  (3.  pi.);  pt.  tunjana. 

VI.:  PR.  tuj6te;    pt.  tujant.     pf.  op.  tutujyat;    pt.  tu- 

tujana  and  tutujana.     ps.  tujyate.     inf.  tujase,  tujaye, 

-tuje.     cs.  PT.  tuj  ay  ant. 
tud  thrust,   VI.  :    pr.   tudati ;    ipv.    tuda ;    tiidantu ;     pt. 

tudant.     IPF.  tudat.     pf.  tutoda.     pp.  tunna. 
tur  (=  tr)  pass,  VI.  :  pr.  tiirati,  -te;   IV.  P. :  ipv.  turya; 

II.  P. :  OP.  turyama.     pf.  op.  tuturyat ;  tuturyama.    pp. 

turta  (B.).     GD.   -turya.     inf.  turvane.      cs.  turayate. 

DS.  tutursati. 
Xvd. splU.Wl. :  PR.trnadmi,  trnatti ;  trntte  (B.) ;  ipf.  atrnat; 

atrndan.     pf.   tatarditha,  tatarda;    pt.  tatrdana.     ao. 

root:  SB.  tardas.   pp.  trnna(VS.).    gd. -trdya.   inf. -trdas. 
trp  he  pleased,  Y .  P. :  pr.  trpnoti ;  sb.  trpnavas ;  ipv.  trpnuhi ; 

trpnutam;  trpnuta;  VI.  P.  :  pr.  trmpati ;   ipv.  trmpa; 

IV. :  PR.  trpyati.     pf.  tatrpiir ;  pt.  tatrpana.    ao.  root : 

PRO.  trpyasma;    a:  atrpat;    pt.  trpant;  red.:  atitrpas; 

atitrpama.    co.  atarpsyat  (B.).    pp.  trpta.    cs.  tarpayati, 

-te  ;  DS.  titarpayisati.     ds.  titrpsati ;  bb.  titrpsat. 


LIST   OF  VERBS  387 

trs  he  thirst II,  lY. :  pr.  trsyati,  -te  ;  rx.  trsyant.     pf.  tatrs- 

lir  ;    PT.  tatrsana  and  tatrsana.     ao.  root :    pt.  trsana ; 

a :  trsat ;  red. :  atitrsama  ;  inj.  titrsas.     pp.  trsita.     cs. 

tarsayati  (B.). 
trh  crush,  VII.  P.  :  pr.  trn^dhi ;  trmhanti ;  ipv.  trn^dhu ; 

SB.  trnahan  (AV.) ;  pt.  trmhant.     pf.  tatarha.      ao.  a : 

atrham.     ps.  trhyate  ;    pp.  trlha,  trdha.     gd.  trdhva. 
tr  cross,  I.  :    pr.  tai^ati,  -te ;  sb.  tarathas  ;    inj.  tarat;   op. 

taret ;  ipv.  tai'a ;  pt.  tarant.   iff.  atarat.   VI. :  pr.  tirati, 

-te ;  SB.  tirati ;  in.t.  tiranta ;  op.  tir^ta,  -tana  (2.  pL);  ipv. 

tira  ;  tirata,  tirantii ;  tiradhvam ;  pt.  tirant.  ipf.  atirat. 

III. :  pt.  titrat.    VIII.  A.  :  tarute.    pf.  tatara ;  titirvir ; 

pt.  tatarus-  (weak  stem)  and  titirvams.     ao.  red. :  ati- 

taras  ;  is  :  atarit ;  atarisma  and  atarima,  atarisur ;  sb. 

tarisas,  tarisat ;  iN.i.taris,  tarit ;  op.  tarisimahi.    ps.  ao. 

atari ;   pp.  tirna.     gd.  tirtva.     inf.  -tiram,  -tire  ;  tara- 

dhyai ;  tarisani.     cs.  tarayati.     ds.  titirsati  (B.).     int. 

tartariti ;  tartiiryante  ;  pt.  taritrat. 
tyaj  forsalce  :  pf.  tityaja  ;  ipv.  tityagdhi.     pp.  tyakta  (B). 

GD.  -tyajya  (B.). 
tras  he  terrified,  I.  P.  :  pr.   trasati.     ao.  red.  :  atitrasan  ; 

is  :  trasis  (B.).     pp.  trasta  (B.).     inf.  trasas.     cs.  trasa- 

yati.     INT.  tatrasyate  (B.). 
tra   rescue,  IV.  A. :    pr.  trayase ;    trayadhve,   trayante ; 

IPV.  trayasva,  trayatam ;  trayetham,  trayetam  ;  traya- 

dhvam,    trayantam ;     pt.    trayamana.       II.    A.  :    ipv. 

trasva ;  tradhvam.     pp.  tatr6.     ao.  s.  :   atrasmahi  (B.). 

SB.  trasate  ;  trasathe  ;  op.  trasitham.    ft.  trasyate  (B.). 

pp.     trata     (B.).       inf.     tramane.       cs.     gdv.     traya- 

yayya. 
tvis  he  stirred,  II.  P.  :  ipf.  atvisur.      VI.  A. :    atvisanta. 

PF.  titvis6  ;  pt.  titvisana.    ppf.  atitvisanta.    pp.  tvisita. 

INF.  tvis6. 
tsar  approach  stecdthihj,   I.    P.  :    pr.  tsarati.     pf.   tatsara. 

ao.  s.  :  atsar ;  is  :  atsarisam  (B.).     gd.  -tsarya  (B.). 
dams,  das  hite,  I.  P.:  pr.  dasati ;  ipv.  dasa;  pt.  dasant.   pf. 

cc  2 


388  APPENDIX   I 

PT.  dadasvams.     pp.  dasta.     or>.  damstva  (B.).     int.  pt. 

daudasana. 
daks  he  ahlc,  I. :  pr,  daksati,  -te  ;  ipv.  daksata  ;  pt.  dak- 

samana.     pf.  dadaks6  (B.).     ao.  red.  :  adadaksat  (B.). 

FT.  daksisyate  (B.).     gdv.  daksayya.     cs.  daksayati  (B.). 
dagh  reach  to,  V.  :    pr.  op.  daghnuyat  (B.).     ao.  root :  in.t. 

dhak  (2.  3.   s.) ;   daghma ;    prc.   daghyas  (8.  s.) ;    ipv. 

dhaktam.      ft.    daghisyante    (B.).     inf.    -daghas  (B.), 

-daghos  (B.). 
dabh,  dambh  Jiarm,  I.  P.  :  pe.  dabhati ;   sb.  dabhati;   inj. 

dabhat.     V.  P.  :  pr.  dabhnuvanti ;  ipv.  dabhnuhi.     pf. 

dadabha,     dadambha ;      debhur ;     inj.     dadabhanta. 

AO.   root :    dabhur ;    inj.  dabhvir.       ps.  dabhyate  ;    pp. 

dabdha.     gdv.   dabhya.     inf.  -dabhe;    dabdhum  (B,). 

cs.  dambhayati.     ds.  dipsati;  sb.  dipsat;  pt.  dipsant; 

PR.  dhipsati  (B.). 
das,  das  lay  tvaste,  IV.  P.  :  pr.  dasyati ;  op.  dasyet.     I.  P.  : 

PR.  dasati ;  sb.  dasat ;  inj.  dasat;  pt.  dasant.     pf.  pt. 

dadasvams.      ao.   a :    inj.   dasat ;    pt.   dasamana ;    is  : 

dasit.     pp.  dasta  (B.).     cs.  dasayate  ;  dasayati. 
dah  hum,    I.    P. :    pr.    dahatl ;    sb.  dahati.    II.    P.  :    pr. 

dhaksi.      pf.  dadaha  (B.).     ao.   s.  :    adhaksit ;    adhak 

(8.  s.j;    INJ.  dhak  (3.   s.) ;   pt.  dhaksant  and  daksant. 

FT.    dhaksyati ;     pt.    dhaksyant.       ps.    dahyate ;    pp. 

dagdha.     gd.  dagdhva  (B.)  ;  -dahya  (B.).     inf.  -dahas 

(B.),  dagdhos  (B.).  dagdhum  (B.).     ds.  dhiksate  (B.). 
1.  da  give,  III.:  pr.   dadati ;    datte;    sb.  dadas,   dadat; 

dadan ;  dadatai  (AV.),  dadamahe;  inj.  dadas,  dadat;  op. 

dadyat ;  dadimahi,  dadiran  ;  ipv.  daddhi,  dehi,  dattat, 

dadatu ;  dattam,  dattam  ;  datta  and  dadata,  dadatana, 

dadatu  ;   A.  datsva  ;  pt.  dadat ;  dadana  ;  iff.  adadam, 

adadas,  adadat ;  adattam  ;  adadata,  adattana.  adadur  ; 

A.  adatta.     I.  :  dadati ;  dadate  ;  inj.  dadat ;    ipv.  da- 

datam  (3.  s.) ;   iff.  adadat ;   adadanta.      pf.  dadatha, 

dadau  ;    dadathur,  dadatur ;   dada,  dadvir ;    A.   dad6, 

dadathe,  dadrir6  ;  pt.  dadvams,  dadivams  (AV.),  dada- 


LIST   OF  VEEBS  389 

vams    (AV.) ;    dadana.      ao.    root :     adas,    adat,    dat ; 

adama,   adur,    dur.     A.  adi,  adithas  (B.),  adita  (B.) ; 

adimahi  (TS.)  and  adimahi  (VS.) ;  sb.  das,  dati,  dat ;  inj. 

dur;  OP.  deyam;  ipv.  datu;  datam,  datam ;  data;  disva 

(VS.);  a:    adat.     s. :    adisi ;    sb.  dasat,  dasathas ;    inj. 

desma  (VS.) ;  is:  adadista  (SV.).    ft.  dasyati ;  -te  (B.) ; 

dadisy6  (K.)  ;  data  (B.).     ps.  diyate  ;  pt.  dadyamana  ; 

AO.  dayi ;  pp.  -data,  datta,  -tta.     gdv.  d6ya.    gd.  dattva, 

dattvaya ;    -daya,    -dadya  (AV.).      inf.    -dai,   datave, 

datavai,  damane,  davane  ;  -dam  (B.),  datum ;    dates. 

OS.  dapayati.     ds.  pt.  ditsant,  didasant. 
2.  da  divide,  II.  P. :  pr.  dati ;  danti ;  ipv.  dantu.     VI.  P. : 

PR.  dyami,  dyati;  dyamasi;  ii'V.  dyatu;  dyatam;  IV.  : 

PK.  dayamasi ;    ipv.  dayasva,  dayatam ;    pt.  dayamana. 

iPF.  dayanta.     pf.  dadir^  (B.).     ao.  root :  adimahi  (B.), 

adimahi  (VS.,  K.) ;  s  :  op.  disiya.    ps.  diyate  ;  pp.  dina  ; 

-tta  (B.).     GD.  -daya. 
;J.  da  hind,  VI.  P. :  pr.  dyati ;  ipf.  adyas.     ps.  ao.  dayi ; 

pp.  dita. 
das  niaJie  offering,  I.  P. :  pr.  dasati ;  sb.  dasat ;  op.  dasema  ; 

IPF.  adasat.     II.  P. :  pk.  dasti ;  pt.  dasat.     V.  P.  :  pr. 

dasnoti.     pf.  dadasa.     sb.  dadasas,  dadasati  and  da- 

dasat;  pt.  dadasvams,  dasvams,  dasivams  (SV.).     cs. 

adasayat  (B.). 
dis  point,  Nl.:  pr.  disami.    ipv.  disatu ;  pt.  disant;  disa- 

mana.    pf.  didesa  ;  sb.  didesati  ;  ipv.  dididdhi,  didestu  ; 

didistana.      ppf.  didista  (3.  s.  A.),     ao.   root:   adista; 

8.:    adiksi ;    sa :  adiksat  (B.).     pp.   dista.     gd.  -disya. 

INF.    -dise.      int.    dedisti;     ipf.    dedisam ;    adedista; 

dedisyate. 
dih  smear,  II. :  pr.  d^gdhi  ;  dihanti ;  sb.  d^hat ;  pt.  dihana. 

IPF.  adihan.     ao.  s.  :  adhiksur  (B.).     pp.  digdha. 

1.  difli/,  IV.  :  PR.  diyati;  -te ;  inj.  diyat;  ipv.  diya.    ipf. 
adiyam.     int.  inf.  dediyitavai. 

2.  di,    didi    shine :    pr.    didyati    (3.    pi.) ;    sb.    didayat ; 
ipv.    didihi    und    didihi ;     pt.   didyat ;    didyana.     ipf. 


390  APPENDIX   I 

adides,   adidet.      rr.   did6the,   didaya ;    didiyiir ;    sb. 

dJdayasL-  and    didayas,    didayati    and    didayat.      px. 

didivams. 
diks  he  consecrated,  I.  A.  :  pr.  diksate(B.)-     pf.  didiks6  and 

didiksiir  (B.).  ao,  red. :  adidiksas  (B.) ;  is  :  adiksista  (B,). 

FT.  diksisyate  (B.).     pp.  diksita.    gd.  diksitva  (B.).    cs. 

diksayati  (B.).     ds.  didiksisate  (B.). 
dip  shine,  IV.  A.  :  pr.  dipyate.     ao.  red. :    adidipat;   adi- 

dipat  (B.) ;  inj.  didipas.     cs.  dipayati. 
diy  jylai/,    IV.:    pr,    divyati;    divyate   (B.).     pf.  did^va. 

pp.  dyuta.     GD.  -divya. 
du,  dii  hum,  V.  P.  :  pr.  dunoti;  dunvanti;  pt.  dunvant. 

AO.  is :  SB.  davisani  (or  from  du  go  ?).     pp.  diina. 
dns  sj^oil,  IV.  P.:  pr.  dusyati  (B.).     ao.  red.:   adiidusat ; 

a:    dusat  (B.) ;    is:    dosistam  (B.).     cs.   dusayati;    ft. 

diisayisyami. 
duh  milk,  II.  P. :  pk.  dogdhi ;  diihanti ;  A.  dugdhe  ;  duh9,te 

and  diihat6,  diihrate  and  dulii'e;  sb.  dohat;  dohate ; 

OP.   duhiyat,  duhiyan ;  ipv.  3.    du.  dugdham ;    A.  3.  s. 

duham ;    3.  du.  dnhatham ;    3.   pi.   duhram  (AV.)  and 

duhratam  (AV.);    pt.  duhaut;  dughana,  duhana,  and 

duhana;  ipf.  adhok ;  duhur ;  aduhan  (B.)  and  aduhran 

(AV.).   I.  A.  :  PR.  dohate.    VI. :  ipf.  aduhat  (TS.).  pf.  du- 

doha,  dudohitha;  duduhur;  A.  duduhe  ;  duduhre  and 

dudiihrir^;    pt.  duduhana.     ao.   s:  adhuksata  (3.  pi.) ; 

INJ.  dhuksata  (3.  pi.);   op.  dhuksimahi ;  sa:  adhuksas, 

aduksat  and  adhuksat ;    adhuksan,  duksan  and  dhuk- 

san ;      A.    adhuksata,    duksata    and    dhuksata ;     inj. 

duksas ;    A.  3.  duksata  and  dhuksata ;    pi.  dliuksanta ; 

IPV,    dhuksasva.      ps.  duhyate ;    pt.   duhyamana ;    pp. 

dugdha.     GD.  dugdhva  (B.).    inf.  duhadhyai;  dohase  ; 

dogdhos  (B.).     cs.  dohayati  (B.).     ds.  diiduksati. 
1.  dr  2>ierce,  II.  P. :  pk.  darsi.    IX.  P.  :  op.  drniyat(B.).    pf. 

dadara ;  pt.  dadrvams.     ao.  root :  adar ;  s :  sb.  darsasi, 

darsat ;    A.   darsate ;    op.  darsista.     ps.  diryate   (B.) ; 

PS.  dirna  (B).     gd.  -dirya  (B.).     cs.  darayati ;  darayati 


LIST   OF, VERBS  391 

(B.).      INT.   dardarimi,    dardariti ;    sb.    dardirat ;    ipv. 

dardrhi  and  dadrhi,  dardartu ;  pt.  dardrat ;  daridrat 

(TS.) ;     IFF.   adardar,    dardar   (2.    3.    s.) ;    adardrtam; 

adardirur. 
2.  dr  lieed :  ao.   adrthas  (B.) ;  s :  drdhvam  (B.).     ps.  dri- 

yate  (B.).     gd.  -drtya. 
drp  rave,  IV.   P. :  pr.  drpyati.     ao.  a :    adrpat  (B.).     ft. 

drapsyati   (B.)    and    drapisyati    (B.).     pp.    drpta   and 

drpita. 
drs   see:    pf.    dadarsa;    A.    dadrks6,   dadrse ;    dadrsre, 

dadrsrire  (TS.) ;  ipv.  (3.   pi.  A.)  dadrsram  (AV.);    pt. 

dadrsvams ;  dadrsana.    ao.  root :  adarsam  (B.) ;  adarsma 

(TS.),    adrsma  (B.),    adarsur  (B.);    A.   3.    pi.  adrsran, 

adrsram;  sb.  darsati,  darsathas,  darsan ;  inj.  darsam; 

pt.  drsana  and  drsana ;  a  :  adrsan ;  inj.  drsan  ;  op.  drs6- 

yam;  s:  adrak  (B.)  and  adraksit  (B.) ;  A.  adrksata  (3. 

pi.) ;  SB.  drksase ;    sa  :  drksam  (K.) ;  red.  adidrsat  (B). 

ft.  draksyati  (B.).     ps.  drsyate;    ao.  adarsi  and  darsi ; 

pp.  drsta ;   gdv.  drs6nya.    gd.  drstva,  drstvaya,  -drsya. 

INF.    drse,    drsaye ;    drastum.       cs.    darsayati.       ds. 

didrksase. 
drh  malie  firm,  I.  P. :  ipv.  d]?mha ;  drmhata ;  ipf.  adrmhat. 

VI.  A. :  PR.  drmhethe ;  ipv.  drmhantam ;  pt.  drmhant. 

IPF.   drmhata   (3.    s.).      IV.  :     ipv.    drhya ;    drhyasva. 

PF.  PT.  dadrhana.     ppf.  adadrhauta.     ao.  is  :  adrmhis, 

•  •  •  •  •     •  ' 

adrmhit.     pp.  drdha.     cs.  drmhayati. 
dyut  shine,  I.  A. :  pr.  dyotate.     pf.  didyota ;  didyutur  ; 

A.  didyut6 ;    pt.  didyutana.      ao.  root  :    pt.  dyutant ; 

dyiitana  and  dyutana ;  a:  adyutat  (B.) ;  red. :  adidyutat ; 

inj.  didyutas ;    s.  :    adyaut.     ft.   dyotisyati  (B.).      pp. 

dyutta.    GD.  -dyutya  (B.).    cs.  dyutayati  (shine),  dyota- 

yati  [illumine),    int.  davidyutati  (3.  pi.) ;  sb.  davidyutat; 

pt.  davidyutat ;  ipf.  davidyot. 
1.  dra  nm,  II.  P. :  ipv.  drantu.     pf.  dadriir  ;  pt.  dadrana. 

AO.  s:  SB.  drasat.    cs.  drapayati(B.)  ;  ds.  didrapayisati 

(B.).     int.  pt.  daridrat. 


892  APPENDIX   1 

2.  dr a,  sleep,  II.  F.  :  pk.  drati  (B.).     ao.  sis:  adrasit  (B.). 

FT.  drasyati  (B.).     pp.  drana. 
dru  run,  I.  P.  :  dravati.     pf.  dudrava  (B.) ;  sb.  dudravat. 

ppF.  adudrot.     ao.  red. :   adudruvat  (B.),     ft.  drosyati 

(B.).     pp.   druta  (B.).     od.   drutva  (B.) ;    -drutya  (B.). 

cs.  dravayati  (flows) ;  dravayati.     int.  pf.  dodrava. 
drub  he  hostile,  IV.  P. :  pr.  druhyati  (B.).    pf.  1.  dudroha, 

2.  dudrohitha.     ao.  a  :  druhas  ;  inj.  druhas  ;  druhan  ; 

sa  :  adruksas  (B.).     ft,  dhroksyati.     pp.  drugdha.     gd. 

-druhya.     inf.  drogdhavai.     ds.  dudruksat. 
dvis  hate,  II.  :  pe.  dv6sti ;  dvismas  ;  hb.  dv6sat ;  dv6sama  ; 

A.  dv6sate ;  ipv.  dvestu ;  pt.  dvisant.     pf.  didv6sa  (B.). 

AG.  sa:    INJ.  dviksat;    A.  dviksata  (3.  s.).     pp.  dvista. 

GDv.  dvesya,  -dvisenya.     inf.  dv^stos  (B.). 
dhan  run  :  pf.  sb,  dadhanat ;  op.  dadhanyur ;  pt.  dadhan- 

vams.     cs.  dhanayan  ;  A.  dhanayaute  ;  dhanayanta. 
dhanv    run,    I.    P.  :    pk.    dhanvati ;    sb.    dhanvati ;    ipv. 

dhanva.    pf.  dadhanve  ;  dadhanvir6.     ao.  is  :  adhanv- 

isur, 
dham,   dhma,   hlotc,  I.   P. :    pr.  dhamati ;    pt.  dhamant. 

IPF.    adhamat.      ps.    dhamyate;    dhmayate    (B. );    pp. 

dhamita  and  dhmata.     qd.  dhmaya  (B.). 
1.  dhaj)u/,  III.  :   pr.  dadhami,  dadhasi,  dadhati;    dhat- 

thas ;    dadhmasi   and   dadhmas,  dhatta,  dadhati ;    A. 

dadhe,  dhats6,  dhatta  ;  dadhathe,  dadhate ;   dadhate  ; 

SB.  dadhani,  dadhas,  dadhat ;    dadhathas ;   dadhama, 

dadhan;  A.  dadhase,  dadhate;    dadhavahai;    op.  da- 

dhita  and  dadhita;  dadhimahi;  ipv.  dhehi  and  dhattat, 

dadhatu ;    dhattam,   dhattam ;    dhatta  and  dhattana, 
-    dadhatu ;    A.    dhatsva ;    dadhatam.     pt.  dadhat ;   da- 

dhana.     ipf.  adadham,  adadhas,  adadhat ;  adhattam  ; 

adhatta,   adadhur ;    A.   adhatthas,   adhatta.      pf.   da- 

dhatha,  dadhau ;    dadhatiir ;    dadhima,  dadhur ;    A. 

dadhis6,  dadh6 ;  dadhathe,  dadhate ;    dadhidhve,  da- 

dhir6  and  dadhre ;    ipv.  dadhisva ;  dadhidhvam.     ao. 

root :  adham,  dhas,  adhat  and  dhat ;  dhatam,  adhatam  ; 


LIST    OF  VEEBS  393 

adhur ;  A.  adhithas,  adhita ;  adhitam  ;  adhimahi ;  sb. 

dhas,  dhati  and  dhat ;  dhama ;   dhethe,  dhaithe ;  dha- 

mahe;    inj.  dham;   dhiir;    A.  dhimahi;    op.  dheyam; 

dheyur;    ipv.   dhatu ;    dhatam;    dhata,  dhatana,   and 

dhetana,   dhantu ;  A.  dhisva ;    a  :  adhat  (SV.),    dhat ; 

s:  adhisi(B.);  adhisata  (B.) ;  sb.  dhasathas;  dhasatha; 

INJ.  dhasur ;  op.  dhisiya  (B.),  dhesiya  (MS.),     ft.  dha- 

syati,  -te(B.);  dhata (B.).    ps.  dhiyate;  ao.  adhayi;  pp. 

hita,  -dhita.    gd.  dhitva  (B.),  -dhaya.     inf.  -dhe,  dha- 

tave,    dhatavai,   dhiyadhyai;     -dham;    dhatum   (B.); 

dhatos.    cs.dhapayati;  sb.  dhapayathas.  ds.  didhisati, 

-te;    INJ.  didhisanta;   op.  didhisema;  didhiseya;  ipv. 

didhisantu ;   pt.  didhisana  ;  dhitsati,  -te  ;   gdv.  didhi- 

sayya. 
2.  dha  such,  IV.  P. :    pr.  dhayati.     ao.  root :  adhat.     pp. 

dhita.      GD.   dhitva   (B.),    -dhiya   (B.).      inf.   dhatave. 

cs.  dhapayate  ;  -ti  (B.). 
1.  dhav  run,  I.  :    pk.  dhavati,  -te.     ppf.  adadhavat.     ao. 

is  :  adhavit  (B.).     cs.  dhavayati. 
•1.  dhav   loasli,  I. :    pr.   dhavati,  -te.      ao.  is :   adhavista. 

pp.  dhauta.     cs.  dhavayati,  -te  (B.). 
dhi  thinh,  III. :  pr.  didhye  ;  didhyatham  and  didhitham 

(AV.)  ;  SB.didhayas;  didh^yan;  px.didhyat;  didhyana. 

iPF.  adidhet,  didhet;  adidhayur;  A.  adidhita.  pf.  didh- 

aya ;    didhima,  didhiyur  and  didhyiir ;   didhire.      pf. 

dhita.     INT.  dedhyat  (TS.). 
dhu  shulce,   V.  :    pr.   dhiinoti ;    dhiinut6 ;    sb.   dhunavat ; 

IPV.  dhunuhi  and  dhiinu  ;  dhUnuta ;  A.  dhiinusva ;  pt. 

dhiinvant ;  dhiinvana.    ipf.  adhunot ;  A.  adhunuthas, 

adhiinuta.  VI.  P.:  pr.  dhuvati;  op.  dhiiv^t.  pf.  dudhuv6; 

OP.  dudhuvita.     ppf.   diidhot.     ao.  root :  pt.  dhuvana ; 

s:  A.   adhiisata  (3.  pi.),     ft.   dhavisyati,  -te  (B.).     ps. 

dhiiyate ;    pp.  dhiita.     gd.  dhutva  (B.),  -dhuya.     int. 

dodhaviti ;    pt.    dodhuvat   and  davidhvatj    pf.    davi- 

dhava. 
dhr  liohl :   pf.    dadhartha,  dadhara ;    dadhre,    dadhrird. 


394  APPENDIX   I 

Ao.  root :  iNJ.  dhrthas ;  red.:  adidharat;  didhar  (2.  3.  s.); 

iNJ.  didharat ;  ipv.  didhrtam ;  didhrta.    ft.  dharisyate. 

PS.  dhriyate;  pp.  dhrta.     gd.  dhrtva  (B.),  -dhrtya  (B.). 

INF.  dharmane ;  dhartari ;  dhartavai  (B.).     cs.  dhara- 

yati,    -te;    ft.   dharayisyati ;    ps.    dharyate  (B.).     int. 

dardharsi ;    ipf.   adardhar ;    dadharti  (B.) ;    3.  pi.  da- 

dhrati(B.);  ipv.  dadhartu  (B.). 
dhrs  dare,  V. :  pr.  dhrsnoti :  ipv.  dhrsnuhi.    pf.  dadharsa; 

dadhrsur.     sb.  dadharsati  and  dadharsat;  A.  dadhrs- 

ate ;  inj.  dadharsit :  pt.  dadhrsvams ;  ppp.  dadhrsanta. 

AO.  a :   INJ.  dhrsat :  pt.  dhrsant ;  dhrsamana ;  dhrsana 

(AV.) ;    is  :    adharsisur  (B.j.     pp.   dhrsta   and   dhrsita. 

GDV.  -dhrsya.     gd.  -dhrsya  (B.).     inf.  -dhrse ;  -dhrsas. 

cs.  dharsayati  (B.). 
dhya  think,   IV.   P.  :    pr.    dhyayati.      pf.    dadhyau  (B.). 

AC.   sis:    adhyasisam  (B.).     per.   ft.   dhyata  (B.).     pp. 

dhyata  (B.).     gd.  dhyatva.     ds.  didhyasate  (B.). 
dhraj,    dhraj  sweep,  I. :    pr.    pt.  dhrajant ;    dhrajamana. 

ipf.  adhrajan.     ao.  is  :  op.  dhrajisiya. 
dhvams  scatter,  I.  P. :  pr.  dhvamsati,  -te(B.).    pf.  dadhvase. 

ao.  a :    dhvasan.      pp.  dhvasta  (B.).      cs.   dhvasayati ; 

dhvamsayati,  -te  (B.). 
dhvan  sound :  ao.  is  :  adhvanit.  pp.  dhvanta.   cs.  adhvan- 

ayat;  ao.  inj.  dhvanayit. 
dhvr  injure,  I.  P.  :  pr.  dhvarati  (B.).     ao.  s  :  A.  adhursata 

(3.  pi.),     inf.  dhurvane.     ds.  diidhursati. 
naks  attain,  I.  :  pr.  naksati,  -te ;  inj.  naksat ;  ipv.  naks- 

asva;    pt.  naksant;    naksamana.     ipf.  anaksan.     pf. 

nanaksiir  ;  nanaks^. 

*  ± 

nad  sound,  I.  P.  :  pr.  nadati.     cs.  nadayati.     int.  nanad- 

ati  (3.  pi.) ;  nanadyate  (B.) ;  pt.  nanadat. 

nam  hend,  I. :  pr.  namati,  -te.     pf.  nanama ;  nem6.     ppf. 

nanamas.      ao.    red.:    inj.    ninamas;     s:    anan   (K.) ; 

A.  anamsata  (3.  pL,  B.).     sb.   namsai,   namsante;    pt. 

namasana.     ft.  namsyati  (B.).    pp.  nata ;    gdv.  nantva. 

GD.  -natya  (B.).     inf.  -namam,  -name.     cs.  namayati. 


LIST   OF   VEBBS  395 

INT.  nannamiti ;    nannate  (3.  s.) ;   rr.  nannamat ;  nan- 
namaua  ;  irr.  anannata  (3.  s.). 

1.  nas  he  lost,  IV.  P.  :  tk.  nasyati ;  I.:  pr.  nasati,  -te. 
PF.  nanasa;  nesur(B.).  ao.  red.  :  aninasat;  n^sat;  inj. 
ninasas ;  nesat.  ft.  nasisyati.  pp.  nasta.  cs.  nasa- 
yati ;  inf.  nasayadhyai. 

2.  nas  attain,  I.  :  pr.  nasati,  -te.  ao.  root :  ana];  (2.  3.  s.), 
nat  (3.  s.) ;  anastam ;  inj.  nak  and  nat  (3.  s.)  ;  A.  namsi ; 
OP.  nasimahi ;  s :  sb.  naksat.  inf.  -nase.  ds.  inaksasi ; 
INJ.  inaksat. 

nas  unite,  I.  A. :  pr.   nasate ;    nasamahe ;    inj.   nasanta. 

AG.  root :  OP.  nasimahi. 
nah  hintl,  IV.:   pr.  nahyati;    ipv.  nahyatana  (2.  pi.);    pt. 

nahyamana.      pf.  nanaha.      ps.   pt.    nahyamana;    pp. 

naddha.     gd.  -nahya  (B.). 
nath,  nadh  seek  aid,  I.  A. :  pr.  nathate  (B.) ;  pt.  nadha- 

mana.     pp.  nathita ;  nadhita. 
nij  wash,  II.  A. :    pt.  nijana.     III. :  ipv.  ninikta  (2.  pi.). 

Ao.    a :    anijam  ;    s :  anaiksit ;     inj.   niksi.      pp.  nikta. 

GD.  niktva(B.), -nijya(B.).    inf. -nije.     cs.  nejayati(B.). 

int.  nenikte ;  ipv.  nenigdhi. 
uind,  revile,  I.  P.  :  pr.  nindati ;  sb.  nindat ;  ipv.  nindata. 

PF.    nindima ;     ninidiir.      ao.    root :     pt.  nidana ;     is : 

anindisur ;    sb.  nindisat.      ps.  nindyate ;    pp.  nindita. 

DS.  SB.  ninitsat. 
ni  lead,  I.  :  pr.  nayati,  -te ;  sb.  nayati,  nayat;  A.  nayasai 

(AV.);  inj.  nayat;  nayanta;  ipv.  nayatu;  A.  nayasva  ; 

pt.  nayant;  nayamana ;  ipf.  anayat.     II.:   pr.  n6si(  = 

IPV.) ;  netha;  iff.  anitam  (3.  du.).   pf.  ninetha,  ninaya ; 

ninyathur;  ninye  (B.) ;  sb.  ninithas ;  op.  niniyat;  ipv. 

ninetu.     ao.  s  :    anaista  (2.   pi.) ;    anesata  (3.  pi.) ;    sb. 

n6sati,  n6sat ;    n6satha;    inj.  naista  (2.  pi.);   A.  nesta 

(3.  s.)  ;    is:  anayit  (AV.).     ft.  nesyati;  -te  (B.) ;  nayi- 

syati  (B.).     ps.  niyate ;  pp.  nita.     gd.  nitva  (B.),  -niya. 

inf.  nesani;    n^tavai  (B.);    n6tum  (B.),  nayitum  (B.) ; 

netos  (B.).     ds.  ninisati  (B.).     int.  neniyate. 


396  APPENDIX    I 

nu   praise,    I.  :    pk.    navati ;     navamahe,    navante ;     int. 

navanta;  pt.  navant;  navamana.     ipf.  anavanta.     II. 

P. :    PT.    nuvant ;    ipf.  anavan.     ppf.   anunot,   nunot ; 

Ao.  s  :    A.  anusi ;    anusatam ;     anusata ;     inj.    nusata 

(3.  pi.) ;  is :  A,  anavista.     gdv.  navya.     int.  nonaviti  ; 

nonumas  and  nonumasi ;  sb.  nonuvanta ;  ipf.  navinot ; 

anonavur  ;  pf.  nonava ;  nonuvur. 
nud  push,  VI. :    pk.  nudati,  -te ;  pf.   nunude ;  nunudre. 

AO.  root :    inj.  nutthas :    is :    inj.  nudisthas.     ft.  not- 

'  •  •  • 

syate  (B.).   pp.  nutta ;  nunna  (SV.).    inf.  -nude  ;  -nudas. 

int.  anonudyanta  (B.). 
nrt  dance,  IV.  P. :  pr.  nrtyati ;  ipv.  nrtya,  nrtyatu ;  pt. 

nrtyant.     ao.  root:    nrtur  (pf. '?) ;  a:  pt.  nrtamana  ;  is: 

anartisur.     pp.  nrtta.     cs.  nartayati. 
pac  cooh,  I. :  pr.  pacati,  -te ;  sb.  pacani,  pacati,  pacat ; 

INJ.  pacat ;  ipv.  pacata,  paeantu.     IV.  A. :  pr.  pacyate. 

PF.  papaca  ;  pec6.     ppf.  apeciran.     ao.  s  :    sb.  paksat. 

FT.  paksyati,   -te  (B.) ;    pakta  (B.).     ps.  pacyate.     go. 

paktva.     INF.  paktave.     cs.  pacayati,  -te  (B.). 
pat  fly,  I.  P.  :  pr.  patati ;  sb.  patati,  patat    inj.   patat ; 

OP.  patet ;    ipv.  patatu ;    pt.  patant.     ipf.  apatat.     pf. 

papata ;    petathur,    petatur ;     paptima,    paptur ;    op. 

papatyat;    pt.  paptivams.     ao.  red.  :  apaptat  and  api- 

patat;  apaptama,  apaptan;  inj.  paptas,  paptat;  paptan; 

IPV.  paptata.     ft.  patisyati ;  co.  apatisyat  (B.j.     ps.  ao. 

apati  (B.) ;   pp.  patita.     gd.  patitva,  -patya  (B.).     inf. 

pattave ;    patitum  (B.).      cs.  patayati,   -te ;    patayati. 

Ds.  pipatisati.     int.  papatiti  ;  sb.  papatan. 
pad  go,  IV.:  pr.  padyate  ;  padyati  (B.) ;  ipv.  padyasva ; 

pt.  padyamana ;    ipf.   apadyanta.     pf.  papada ;    ped6 

(B.).     ao.  root :  apadmahi,  apadran ;  sb.  padati,  padat ; 

PRC.   padista;    red.:    apipadama;    s:    inj.   patsi  (1.   s.), 

patthas.     FT.  patsyati  (B.).      ps.  ao.  apadi,  padi ;    pp. 

panna.     gd.  -padya.     inf.  -padas  ;  pattum  (B.),  pattos 

(B.).     cs.  padayati,  -te  ;  ps.  padyate  (B.) :  ds.  pipada- 

yisati  (B.). 


LIST   OF  VERBS  397 

pan  admire,  I.  A. :  pr.  in.t.  pananta.     pf.   papana  (1.  s.)  ; 

papn6.      Ao.    is :     panista   (3.    s.).      ps.    panyate ;    pp. 

panita.     cs.  panayati,  -te ;    gdv.  panayayya.     int.  pt. 

panipnat. 
pas  see,  IV. :  pr.  pasyati,  -te ;   sb.  pasyani,  pasyasi  and 

pasyas,   pasyat ;   pasyama,   pasyan ;    inj.   pasyat ;  op. 

pasyet ;  pasyeta  ;  ipv.  pasya ;  pasyasva  ;  pt.  pasyant ; 

pasyamana ;  ipf.  apasyat ;  apasyanta.    Cp.  spas. 

1.  pa  drinlc,  I. :  pr.  pibati,  -te ;  se.  pibasi,  pibati  and 
pibat ;  pibava,  pibathas,  pibatas ;  inj.  pibat ;  ipv. 
pibatu ;  pibasva ;  pibadhvam  ;  pt.  pibant ;  ipf.  apibat. 
III.  :  PR.  pipite  (B.),  pipate  (B.) ;  op.  pipiya  (B.) ;  ipf. 
apipita(B.);  ipv.  pipatu  (K.)  ;  pt.  pipana  and  pipana 
(AV.).  PF.  papatha,  papau ;  papathur,  papxir;  A. 
pap6 ;  papir6 ;  op.  papiyat;  pt.  papivams ;  papana. 
AO.  root :  apam,  apas,  apat ;  apama,  apur ;  sb.  pas ; 
pathas;  panti ;  prc.  peyas  (3.  s.);  ipv.  pahi,  patu ; 
patam,  patam ;  pata  and  patana,  pantu  ;  pt.  pant ;  s  : 
inj.  pasta  (3.  s.).  ft.  pasyati,  -te  (B.).  ps.  piyate ;  ao. 
apayi ;  pp.  pita.  gd.  pitva,  pitvi ;  -paya.  inf.  pitaye, 
patave,  patavai ;  patos  (B.) ;  pibadhyai.  cs.  payayati ; 
Ds.  pipayayiset  (K.).  ds.  pipasati;  pipisati;  pt. 
pipisant. 

2.  pa  protect,  II. :  pr.  pami,  pasi,  pati ;  pathas,  patas ; 
patha,  pathana,  panti ;  sb.  pat ;  patas ;  ipv.  pahi, 
patu ;  patam,  patam ;  pata,  pantu  ;  pt.  pant ;  pana  ; 
ipf.  apam,  apas,  apat ;  apama,  apur.     ao.  s  :  sb.  pasati. 

pi,  pi  swell,  I.  A.  ;  pr.  payate.  II.  A.  :  pt.  piyana.  V. : 
PR.  pinvire  ;  pt.  pinvant,  f.  pinvati ;  pinvana.  pf.  pi- 
p6tha,  pipaya  ;  pipyathur;  pipyiir  ;  pipye  (3.  s.) ;  sb, 
pipayas,  pipayat ;  pipayatas ;  pipayan  ;  pipayata ; 
pipayanta  ;  inj.  pipes  ;  ipv.  pipihi,  pipaya  ;  pipyatam, 
pipyatam  ;  pipyata  pt.  pipivams  ;  pipyana  and 
pipyana.  ppf.  apipe  ;  apipema,  apipyan ;  apipayat ; 
apipayanta.     pp.  pina  (AV.). 

pinv  fatten,  I.  :  pr.  pinvati,  -te ;  inj.  pinvat ;  pinvanta ; 


398  APPENDIX   I 

ipv.  pinva ;  pinvatam ;  pinvata ;  A.  pinvasva,  pinv- 
atam ;  pinvadhvam  ;  pt.  pinvant ;  pinvamana  ;  iff. 
apinvam,  apinvas,  apinvat ;  apinvatam ;  apinvata, 
apinvan ;  A.  3.  s.  apinvata.  pf.  pipinvathur.  pp. 
pinvita  (B.).     cs.  pinvayati  (B.).     Cp.  pi  sicell. 

pis  adorn,  Yl.  :  pr.  pimsati,  -te.  pf.  pip6sa;  pipisur;  A. 
pipis6 ;  pipisr6,  ao.  root :  pt.  pisana.  ps.  pisyate ; 
pp.  pista ;  pisita.     int.  pt,  p^pisat ;  pepisana. 

pis  crush,  VII.  P. :  pr.  pinasti ;  pimsanti ;  inj.  pinak  (2.  3. 
s.) ;  IPV.  pinastana ;  pt.  pimsant ;  ipf.  pinak.  VI.  P.  : 
iPF.  apisan  (AV.).  pf.  pip6sa  ;  pipis^.  ao.  sa :  apik- 
san  (B.).  PS.  pisyate  (B.) ;  pp.  pista.  gd.  pistva  (B.). 
i\p.  p^stavai  (B.) ;  p6stum  (B.). 

pid press:  pf.  pipid6.     cs.  pidayati. 

pus  thrive,  IV.  P.  :  pr.  pusyati.  pf.  puposa  ;  op.  pupusyas ; 
PT.  pupusvams.  ao.  root :  prc.  pusyasam  (B.)  ;  pns- 
yasma  (B.) ;  a  :  op.  pus^yam  ;  pus6ma.  pp.  pusta.  inf. 
pusyase.     cs.  posayati. 

pu  cleanse,  IX. :  pr.  punami,  punati ;  punanti ;  punite ;  pu- 
nate  (AV.)and  punat6;  ipv.  punihi  and  punitat,  punatu ; 
punitam  ;  punita,  punitana  and  punata,  punantu ;  pt. 
punant ;  punana ;  ipf.  apunan.  I.  A. :  pr.  pavate ; 
SB.  pavate ;  ipv.  pavasva,  pavatam ;  pavadhvam, 
pavantam;  pt.  pavamana;  ipf.  apavathas.  pf.  pupuv- 
vir  (B.) ;  pupuv6  (B.).  ppf.  apupot.  ao.  is  :  apavisur  ; 
iN.T.  pavista  (3.  s.).  ps.  puyate;  pp.  puta.  on.  putvi ; 
piitva ;  -piiya  (B,).  inf.  pavitum  (B.).  cs.  pavayat, 
-te  (B.),  pavayati  (B. ). 

pr  j^ciss.  III.  P.  :  PR.  piparsi,  piparti ;  piprthas ;  piprtha, 
piprati  ;  ipv.  piprhi  and  piprtat,  pipartu;  piprtam;  pi- 
prta  and  pipartana.  ao.  red. :  apiparam,  apiparas ;  api- 
paran ;  inj.  piparas,  piparat  and  piparat ;  s  :  sb.  parsati, 
parsat ;  ipv.  parsa  ;  is  :  sb.  parisat.  inf.  parsani.  cs. 
parayati ;  sb.  parayati ;  pt.  parayant. 

pre  mix,  VII.  :  pb.  prnaksi ;  prncanti ;  A.  prnc6,  prnkte  ; 
prncate  (3.  pi.) ;    inj.   prnak  (3.  s.) ;   op.  prncita ;    ipv. 


LIST   OF  VERBS  399 

prndhi  (=  prngdhi),  prnaktu;  prnktam ;  pt.  prncant; 

prncana ;  ipf.  aprnak  (3.  s.).     III.  P.  :  ipv.  piprgdhi ; 

piprkta.     pf.  paprciir  (B.) ;  sb.  paprcasi ;  op.  paprcyam, 

paprcyat ;    pt.   paprcana.      ao.  root :    sb.  parcas ;    op. 

prcimahi  ;    pt.  prcana  ;    s  :  aprak  ;    A.  aprksi,  aprkta. 

PS.  prcyate;  pp.  prkta;  -prgna.     inf.  -proe ;  prcas. 
prn  fill,  VI. :  pr.  prnati ;  sb.  prnaithe  (du.  2.)  ;  ipv.  prna ; 

prnata ;  prnasva ;  prnadhvam  ;  ipf.  aprnat.     inf.  prna- 

dhyai.     Cp.  pf  fill. 
pf  fill,  IX. :  PR,  prnami,  prnasi,  prnati ;  prnitas ;  prnanti ; 

SB.   prnati,  prnat ;    op.  prniyat ;    ipv.  prnihi,  prnatu  ; 

prnitam  ;    prnita,  prnitana ;    A.  prnisva ;  pt.  prnant ; 

ipf.  aprnas,  aprnat.      III. :  pr.  piparmi,  piparti ;  pi- 

prati  (3.  pi.) ;    ipv.  pipartu ;  piprtam ;  pipartana;    ipf. 

apiprata  (3.  s.  =  apiprta).     pf.  op.  pupiiryas  ;  pt.  papr- 

vams.      AO.  root:    ipv.  piirdhi  ;    pec.  priyasam  (AV.) ; 

red. :  apupuram  (B.) ;  in.t.  piparat ;  ipv.  pupurantu  ;  is  : 

puristhas  (B.).      ps.  piiryate  (B.) ;    pp.  piirna  ;    purta. 

inf.  -puras  (K.).     cs.  purayati ;  sb.  piirayati. 
T^yhfill  up,  IV.  A. :  pr.  pyayase ;  ipv.  pyayasva,  pyayatam ; 

pyayantara  ;  pt.  pyayamana.     ao.  sis  :  op.  pyasisimahi 

(A v.).     pp.  pyata.     cs.  pyayayati ;  ps.  pyayyate  (B.). 
prach  asl;  VI.  :  pr.  prchati,  -te  ;  sb.  prchat ;  prchan  ;  A. 

prchai.     pf.  papracha ;  paprachiir  (B.).     ao.  s  :  aprak- 

sam,  aprat ;    apraksit.     ft.  praksyati  (B.).     ps.   prch- 

yate ;    pp.   prsta ;     gdv.   paprks^nya.      inf.   -prcham, 

-pfche  ;  prastum. 
prath  spread,  I.  A.  :  pr.  prathate.     pp.  2.  papratha  (=  pa- 

prat-tha  ?) ;    A.  paprath6    and    paprathe   (3.  s.) ;     sb. 

paprathas,  paprathat ;  paprathan  ;  inj.  paprathanta ; 

PT.  paprathana.     ao.  root :    pt.  prathana ;  is :  3.  s.  A. 

aprathista ;  prathista.     cs.  prathayati,  -te. 
ipvafill,  II.  P. :  PR.  prasi.     pf.  papratha,  papra  and  paprau ; 

paprathur,  papratur ;  papriir  ;    A.  paprs6,  papr6  ;    pt. 

paprvams.     ao.  root :  aprat ;    sb.  pras  ;  s  :  3.  s.  apras. 

PS.  AO.  aprayi ;  pp.  prata. 


400  APPENDIX    I 

pri  p?msr,  IX. :  pr.  prinati;  prinit6 ;  pt.  prinant ;  prlnana. 

iPF.  aprinat.     pf.  pipriye  ;  se.  piprayas,  piprayat ;  ipv. 

piprihi  ;  piprayasva ;  pt,  pipriyana.     ppf.  apiprayam, 

apipres  (B.) ;    apiprayan.       ao.   s  :    apraisit  (B.)  ;    sb. 

pr^sat.     pp.  prita.     gd.  pritva  (B.).     ds.  piprisati. 
pruth  snort,  I. :  pr.  prothati ;  pt.  prothant ;  prothamana. 

GD.  -pruthya.     int.  pt.  popruthat. 
prus  sp-inkle,  V. :  pr.  prusnixvanti ;  prusnut^ ;  sb.  prus- 

navat.     VI.  P.  :  ipv.  prusa ;  pt.  prusant.     IV.  P.  :  ipf. 

aprusyat   (B.).      IX.    P. :    pt.    prusnant   (B.).     ft.   pt. 

prosisyant.     pp.  prusita. 
^\\x  float,  I.  :  PR.  plavate  ;  plavati  (B.).     pf.  pupluv6  (B.). 

AO.  red. :  apiplavam  (B.)  ;  s :  aplosta  (B.).     ft.  plosyati, 

-te(B.).     pp.  pluta.     GD. -pluya  (K.).     cs.  plavayati  (B.). 

int.  popluyate  (B.). 
psa  devour,  II.  P.  :  pr.  psati.     ps.  apsiyata  (B.)  ;  pp.  psata. 

GD.  -psaya  (B.). 
phan  spring'.,  cs.  phanayati.     int.  pt.  paniphanat. 
bandh  hind,  IX. :  pr.  badhnami ;  badhnimas,  badhnanti ; 

A.  badhnate  (3.  pi.) ;    ipv.  badhana,  badhnatu  ;    badh- 

nantu ;  A.  badhnitam  (3.  s.).     ipf.  abadhnat ;   abadh- 

nan  ;  A.  abadhnita  (3.  s.).    pp.  babandha  ;  bedhur.    ft. 

bhantsyati.    ps.  badhyate;  pp.  baddha.    gd.  baddhva; 

baddhvaya  (B.);  -badhya  (B.).    inf.  -badhe.   cs.  bandh- 

ayati  (B.). 
badh  oppress,  I.  A.  :    pr.  badhate.     pf.  babadh6.     ao.  is  : 

iNJ.  badhista.    pp.  badhita.    gd.  -badhya.     inf.  badhe. 

cs.  badhayati.     ds.  bibhatsate;  bibadhisate  (B.).     int. 

babadhe    (3.    s.) ;    badbadhd ;     pt.    babadhana ;    bad- 

badhana. 
budh  wake,  I.  P.  :  pr.  bodhati ;  sb.  bodhati ;  inj.  bodhat ; 

IPV.   bodhatu.     IV. :    pr.    budhyate ;    op.  biidhyema  ; 

IPV.  budhyasva ;  budhyadh vara ;  px.  budhyamana.    pf. 

bubudh6 ;    sb.    bubodhas,    bubodhati ;     bubodhatha ; 

PT.   bubudhana.      ao.  root:  A.   3.   pi.   abudhran,  abu- 

dhram ;     ipv.   bodhi    (2.    s.) ;     pt.    budhana ;     a :    inj. 


LIST   OF   VERBS  401 

budhanta ;    red.  :  abubudhat ;    s :  A.  abhutsi ;  abhuts- 

mahi,  abhutsata;  is:  SB.  bodhisat.  ft.  bhotsyati(B.).  ps. 

AO.  abodhi;  pp.  bviddha.    gd.  -budhya  (B.),   inf.  -budhe. 

cs.  bodhayati;    bodhayate  (B.).      int.  bobudhiti  (B.). 
brh   malx  big,   VI.  P.:  pr.  brhati.     I.  :  pr.  brmhati,  -te 

(B.).     PF.  babarha ;  pt.  babrhana.     ao.  is :  inj.  barhis, 

barhxt.     cs.  barhaya.     int.  sb.  barbrhat;  ipv.  barbrhi. 
brti   sai/,    II.:    pr.    bravimi,    bravisi,    braviti ;    briimas, 

bruvanti ;  A.  bruve,  brus6,  brut6  and  bruve  ;  bruvate  ; 

bruvate  ;  sb.  bravani  and  brava,  bravasi  and  bravas, 

bravat;  bravama,  bravatha  (AV.),   bravan  ;  A.  brava- 

vahai,  bravaite ;  bravamahai ;  op.  bruyat ;  bruyatam ; 

A.  bruvita;  bruvimahi;  ipv.  bruhi  and  brutat,  bravitu  ; 

brutam  ;  bruta  and  bravitana,  bruvantu ;  pt.  bruvant ; 

bruvana.     ipf.  abravam,  abravis,  abravit ;  abrutam  ; 

abravita,  abruvan. 
bhaks  eat:  ao.   red.:    ababhaksat  (B.) ;    cs.   bhaksayati; 

bhaksayate  (B.) ;  ps.  bbaksyate  (B.). 
bhaj    divide,    I. :    pr.   bhajati,    -te.     II.   P.  :    pr.    bhaksi 

(=ipv.).      pF.   2.  s.  babhaktha  (B.),  3.  s.  babhaja ;    A. 

bheje;  bhejate  ;  bhejir6:  pt.  bliejana.     ao.  red.:  abi- 

bhajur   (B.) ;    s:    abhak   and   abhaksit ;    A.    abhaksi, 

abhakta  ;  sb.  bhaksat ;   inj.  bhak  (2.  3.  s.) ;  op.  bhak- 

siya,  bhaksita  ;  bhaksimahi  ;  pro.  bhaksista.    ft.  bhak- 

syati,  -te  (B.).    ps.  bhajyate ;  pp.  bhakta.     gd.  bhaktva  ; 

bhaktvaya  ;  -bhajya  (B.).     cs.  bhajayati ;  ps.  bhajyate. 
bhanj  hreal;  VII.  P. :  pr.  bhanakti ;  ipv.  bhandhi,  bha- 

naktu ;  pt.  bhanj  ant.     ipf.  abhanas  (for  abhanak,  AV.). 

PF.  babhanja.     ps.  bhajyate. 
bhan  s2)eaJc,   I.  :    pr.  bhanati ;  bhananti ;   inj.  bhananta. 

IPF.  bhananta. 
bhas  devour,  III.  :  pr.  babhasti;  bapsati ;  sb.  babhasat ; 

bapsathas  ;  pt.  bapsat.  VI.  P. :  pr.  bhasathas.     I.  P. : 

inj.  bhasat. 
bha  shine,  II.  P.  :  bhasi,  bhati ;  bhanti ;  ipv.  bhahi  ;  pt. 

f.  bhati.     ft.  bhasyati  (B.). 

1819  D   d 


402  APPENDIX   I 

bhiks  hcf/,  I.  A.  :  pr.  bhiksate;  inj.  bhiksanta ;  op,  bhik- 
seta;  pt.  bhiksamana.     pf.  bibhiks6  (B.). 

bhid  split.  VII. :  pr.  bhinadmi,  bhinatsi,  bhinatti  ;  bhind- 
anti ;  sb.  bhinadas,  bhinadat ;  inj.  bhinat  (2,  3.  s.) ; 
OP.  bhindyat ;  ipv.  bhindhi,  bhinattu ;  bhintta ;  pt. 
bhindant ;  bhindana.  ipf.  bhinat  (2.  3.  s.) ;  abhinat 
(8.  s.)  ;  abhindan.  pp.  bibh^da;  bibhidur.  ao.  root: 
abhedam,  hh.6t  (2.  3.  s.),  abhet  (3,  s.) ;  sb.  bh^dati ;  inj. 
bh6t  (2.  s.) ;  pt.  bhidant ;  a  :  op.  bhid^yam  ;  s  :  inj. 
bhitthas.  ft.  bhetsyate  (B,).  ps.  bhidyate  (B.) ;  ao. 
abhedi  (B.) ;  pp.  bhinna.  gd,  bhittva ;  -bhidya.  inf. 
bh6ttavai  (B.) ;  bh^ttum  (B.).     ds.  bibhitsati. 

bhi /ear,  III.  P.  :  pr.  bibheti;  bibhyati;  inj.  bibh^s  ;  op. 
bibhiyat ;  ipv.  bibhita,  bibhitana ;  pt.  bibhyat ;  ipf. 
bibhes,  abibhet.  I.  A. :  pr.  bhayate ;  sb.  bhayate ; 
IPV.  bhayatam  (8.  s.) ;  ipf.  abhayanta ;  pt.  bhayamana. 
PF.  bibhaya  (1.  s.),  bibhaya  (B.  also  bibhaya) ;  bibhya- 
tur ;  bibhyur ;  pt.  bibhivams ;  per.  pp.  bibhayam 
cakara.  ao.  root :  inj.  bh6s  (TS.) ;  bhema  ;  pt.  bhiy- 
ana;  red.:  bibhayat ;  abibhayur  (Kh.) ;  abibhayanta  ; 
s:  bhaisis  (AV.) ;  abhaisma,  abhaisur;  pt.  bhiyasana 
(A v.).  CO.  abhe.syat  (B.).  pp.  bhita.  inf.  bhiyase.  cs. 
bhisayate  (B.) ;  ao.  bibhisas;  bibhisathas. 

1.  bhuj  enjoy,  VII.  A.  :  pr.  bhunkte  ;  bhunjate  and  bhunj- 
at6  ;  SB.  bhunajamahai  ;  pt.  f.  bhunjati.  pf.  btibhuj^  ; 
bubhiijmahe,  bubhujrird.  ao.  root :  sb.  bhojate  ;  inj. 
bhojam;  a:  op.  blitij^nia  ;  ipv.  bhuja  (TS.).  ps.  bhuj- 
yate  (B.).     inf.  bhuj6  ;  bhojase.     cs.  bhojayati. 

2.  bhuj  bend,  VI.  P.  :  inj.  bhujat ;  ipv.  bhuja  (VS.).  ppf, 
abubhojis.     gd.  -bhujya  (B.). 

bhur   quiver,    VI.:     inj.    bhuranta;    ipv.  bhurantu ;    pt. 

bhuramana.    int.  jarbhuriti;  pt.  jarbhurat ;  jarbhur- 

ana. 
bhu  le,  I.  :    pr.   bhavati ;    bhavats  (B.).      pf.  babhuva, 

babhutha   and   babhuvitha,   babhuva;    babhuvathur, 

babhuvatur;    babhuvima,    babhuva,    babhuvur;    op. 


LIST   OF   VERBS  403 

babhuyas,  babhuyat ;    ipv.  babhutu  ;  pt.  babhuvams. 

Ao.  root :  abhuvam,  abhus,  abhut;  abhutam,  abhutam ; 

abhuma,  abhuta  and  abhutana,  abhuvan ;  sb.  bhiivani, 

bhuvas,   bhvivat ;     bhuthas,    bhutas ;     bhuvan ;     inj. 

bhuvam,  bhus,  bhut ;    bhuma ;   op.  bhuyas,  bhuyat ; 

bhuyama ;    pro.   bhuyasam,    3.    bhuyas ;    bhuyasma, 

bhuyasta  ;    ipv.  bodhi  (for  bhudhi),  bhutu  ;   bhutain  ; 

bhuta  and  bhutana  ;    a :  bhiivas,  bhuvat ;    red.  :  abu- 

bhuvas.      FT.    bhavisyati;    bhavita   (B.).      pp.    bhuta. 

GDV.    bhavya    and   bhavya ;    bhavitva.       gd.    bhutvi, 

bhutva ;  -bhuya.   inf.  bhuve,  -bhxive,  -bhve  ;  bhusani ; 

bhavitum  (B.) ;  bhavitos  (B.).     cs.  bhavayati.     ds.  bii- 

bhusati.     int.  b6bhaviti. 
bhr  hear,  I. :   pr.  bharati,  -te.     III.  :    pr.    bibharmi,   bi- 

bharsi,  bibharti ;  bibhrthas,  bibhrtas ;  bibhrmasi  and 

bibhrmas,  bibhrtha,  bibhrati ;  sb.  bibharani,  bibharat ; 

op.    bibhryat ;     ipv.    bibhrhi,    bibhartu ;     bibhrtam ; 

bibhrta  (TS.) ;  pt.  bibhrat ;  ipf.  abibhar.     pp.  jabhartha, 

jabhara  ;  jabhriir ;  A.  jabhrs6,  jabhr6  ;  jabhrir6  ;    ba- 

bhara  (B.) ;    A.  babhr6 ;    pt.  babhrana  ;    sb.  jabharat. 

PPF.    ajabhartana.      ao.    root:    pro.    bhriyasam;    ipv. 

bhrtam ;     s:    abharsam,   3.   abhar;    abharstara ;    sb. 

bharsat;    inj.  3.  s.  bhar;    is:  abbarisam.     ft.   bhari- 

syati ;  bharta  (B.).     co.  abharisyat.     Ps.  bhriyate ;  sb. 

bhriyate ;    ao.   bhari ;    pp.   bhrta.      gd.  -bhrtya.      inf. 

bhartum ;    bhartave,   bhartavai ;    bharadhyai ;    bhar- 

mane.      ds.   bubhursati  (B.).      int.  jarbhrtas ;    bhari- 

bhrati  (3.  pi.);  sb.  bharibharat ;  pt.  bharibhrat. 
bhrams  fall,  I.  :  pr.  inj.  bhramsat.     ao.  a  :  inj.  bhrasat. 

pp.  -bhrsta ;  bhrasta.     cs.  pt.  bhrasayant. 
bhraj  shine,   I.   A. :    pr.  bhrajate ;    pt.  bhrajamana.     ao. 

root:  abhrat;  pro.  bhrajyasam.     ps.  ao.  abhraji. 
mamh,  mah  be  great,  I.  :  pr.  mamhate;  mahe  (3.  s.) ;  op. 

mahema,  maheta ;  ipv.  mamhatam  ;  pt.  mamhamana. 

ipf.   amamhata.     pf.   mamah^  (1.  3.) ;    sb.  mamahas ; 

INJ.  mamahanta ;  ipv.  mamaliasva,  mamahantam  ;  pt. 

D  d  2 


404  APPENDIX   I 

mamahana.  pp.  niahita  (B.).  inf.  mah6,  mahaye.  cs. 
inahayati,  -te  ;  inj.  mamhayam.  ;  pt.  mahayant  ; 
mahayamana. 

majj  si)i]c,  I.  P. :  majjati.  ao.  root :  op.  majjyat  (B.).  ft. 
manksyati,  -te  (B.).     gd.  -majjya.     cs.  majjayati  (B.). 

math,  manth  stir,  IX.  :  pr.  mathnami ;  mathnite  (B. ) ; 
ipv.  mathnita,  mathnantu ;  pt.  mathnant ;  ipf.  amath- 
nat ;  I,  manthati,  -te  ;  mathati  (AV.).  pf.  mamatha  ; 
methur  (B.) ;  A.  methir^  (B.).  ao.  root :  sb.  mathat ; 
is  :  amanthistam  (3.  du.) ;  amathisata  (B.)  ;  inj.  mathis, 
mathit.  ft.  manthisyati  (B.) ;  mathisyati,  -te  (B.). 
PS.  mathyate ;  pp.  mathita.  gd.  mathitva  (B.) ;  -mathya 
(B.).     INF.  manthitavai ;  mathitos  (B.). 

mad  he  exhilarated,  I.:  pk.  madati;  -te.  III.  P.:  pr,  ma- 
matsi.  II.  P.  :  pr.  matsi  (—  ipv.).  IV.  P.  :  pr.  madyati 
(B.).  PF.  mamada ;  sb.  mamadas,  mamadat ;  mamadan  ; 
ipv.  mamaddhi,  mamattu ;  mamattana.  ppf.  ama- 
madur.  ao.  root:  ipv.  matsva ;  red.:  amimadas;  A. 
amimadanta;  s  :  amatsur  ;  A.  amatta  (3.  s.)  ;  amatsata 
(3.  pi.);  SB.  matsati  and  matsat;  matsatha;  inj.  mat- 
sata  (3.  pi.) ;  is :  amadisur.  ps.  pt.  madyamana  ;  pp. 
matta.  gdv.  -madya.  inf.  maditos  (B.).  cs.  mada- 
yati ;  madayati,  -te ;  sb.  madayase,  madayate ; 
madayaite ;  madayadhve  and  madayadhvai ;  inf. 
madayadhyai ;  pp.  madita. 

man  fJiinl;  IV.  A. :  pr.  manyate.  VIII.  A. :  pr.  manv6 
manmahe,  manvat6 ;  sb.  manavai,  manavate ;  inj 
manvata  (3.  pi.) ;  op.  manvita ;  ipv.  A.  :  manutam  (3.  s.) 
PT.  manvana;  ipf.  amanuta  (3.  s.) ;  amanvata  (3.  pi.) 
pf.  men6  (B.);  mamnathe,  mamnate ;  op.  mamanyat 
IPV.  mamandhi.  ppf.  amaman  (3.  s.).  ao.  root :  amata 
amanmahi ;  sb.  manamahe,  mananta ;  pt.  manana 
s :  A.  amamsta ;  amamsatam ;  amamsata  ;  sb 
mamsai,  mamsase,  maipsate  and  marnsatai  (TS.) 
mamsante ;  inj.  mamsthas,  mamsta  and  mamsta  (AV.) 
op.    masiya,    mamsisthas,    marasista ;       mamsimdhi 


LIST   OF   VERBS  405 

mamsirata  ;  ipv.  mandhvam  (B.).  ft.  manisy6  ;  mam- 
syate  (B.).  pp.  mata.  gd.  -matya  (B.).  inf.  mautave, 
mantavai;  mantos  (B.).  cs.  manayati;  op.  manayet. 
DS.  mimarpsate  (AV.),  -ti  (B.) ;  ao.  is  :  amimamsisthas 
(B.).  pp.  mimamsita  (AV.). 
mand  exhilarate,  I. :  pr.  mandati,  -te.  pf.  mamanda  ;  sb. 
mamandat ;  pt.  f.  mamandusi.  ppf.  amamandur.  ao. 
root :  mandiir  ;  pt.  mandana ;  is  :  amandit;  amandisur  ; 
mandista  (3.  s.  A.) ;  amandisatam  (3.  du.  A.) ;  op.  mandi- 
simahi  (VS.).  inf.  mandadhyai.  cs.  mandayati ;  inf. 
mandayadhyai. 

1.  ma  ineasttre,  III.:  pk.  mime,  mimite  ;  mimate ;  mimi- 
mahe,  mimate ;  op.  mimiyas,  mimiyat ;  ipv.  mimihi, 
mimatti ;  mimitam,  mimitam  ;  A.  mimisva ;  mimatham ; 
PT.  mimana.  ipf.  am.imithas,  amimita.  pf.  mamatiir  ; 
mamur;  mame  (1.  3.);  mamate ;  mamir6 ;  ao.  root: 
IPV.  mahi;  masva ;  pt.  mana  (TS.) ;  s:  amasi;  sb. 
masatai  (AV.).  ps.  ao.  amayi;  pp.  mita;  odv.  m6ya 
(A v.).     GD.  mitva  ;  -maya.     inf.  -xn6,  -mat. 

2.  ma  hello tv,  III.  P. :  pr.  mimati ;  mimanti.  pf.  mimaya; 
SB.  mimayat.  ppf.  amiraet.  inf.  matavai.  int.  pt. 
memyat. 

mi  fix,  V.  P. :  pr.  minomi,  minoti ;  sb.  minavama ;  inj. 

minvan;    ipv.    minotti.     ipf.   minvan.      pf.    mimaya; 

mimyur.     ps.  miyate;  pt.  miyamana;   pp.  mita.     gd. 

-mitya  (B,). 
miks   mix :    pf.    mimiksathur,    mimiksatur ;    mimikse ; 

m.imiksire.     ipv.  mim.iksva.     cs.  meksayati  (B.). 
mith  alternate,  I. :  pr.  m6thamasi ;  A.  m^thete.     VI.  P. : 

pt.  mithant.     pf.  mimetha.     pp.  mithita. 
mis  mix  :   ds.    mimiksati ;    ipv.  mimiksa  ;    mimiksatam, 

mimiksatam. 
mis  wink,  VI.  P. :  pr.  misati ;  misanti ;  pt.  misant.     inf. 

-misas. 
mih  shed  'water,  I.  :  pr.  m6hati ;  pt.  mehant ;  m^ghamana. 


406  APPENDIX   I 

Ao.  sa  :  amiksat  (B.).    ft.  meksyati.     pp.  midha.     inf. 

mih6.     cs.  mehayati.     int.  memihat  (B.). 
mi  damage,  IX.  :  pe.  minami,  minati;  nainimasi,  minanti ; 

SB.  minat ;    minama ;    inj.   minit  (AV.)  ;    minan ;    pt. 

minant ;    minana.     ipf.  aminas,    atninat ;    aminanta. 

IV.  A. :  PK.  miyase,  miyate ;  op.  miyeta(B.).   pp.  mimaya; 

mimaya   (AV.).      ao.    s  :    inj.    mesi,    mesthas,    mesta. 

PS.  miyate  ;  ao.  amayi  (B.) ;  pp.  mita.     inf.  m6tos  (B.) ; 

-miyam,  -miye.     int.  pt.  memyana. 
miv  push,   I.  P. :    pr.  mivati ;    pt.  mivant.     i-i-.   -muta ; 

mivita  (B.).     gd.  mivya  (B.). 
muc  release,  VI.  :  pr.  muneati,  -te ;  sb.  muncasi,  muncat ; 

ipv.   muncatu ;  A.  muiieatam ;  pt.  muncant ;  muiica- 

mana.    ipf.  amuncat ;  A.  amuncata.     IV.  A. :  pr.  muc- 

yase ;  sb.  mucyatai(AV.).    pf.  mumucmahe,  mumucre  ; 

SB.  mumueas;  raumocati,  mum.ocat,  mvim^ucat;  ipy.  m.u- 

mugdhi,  mumoktu ;  2.  du.  miimuktam,  mumocatam ; 

mumocata ;    pt.  miumiicana.     ppf.  amumuktam.     ao. 

root :  amok  ;  amuktam  ;  A.  amugdhvam  ;  pro.  mucista  ; 

a :  mucas,  amueat ;  sb.  mucati ;  mucate ;  inj.  mueas, 

mucat ;    ipv.  muca ;   A.  mueadhvam  ;  s :  amauk  (B.) ; 

A.  amuksi,  amukthas ;  inj.  mauk  (VS.);  A.  muksata 

(3.  pi.) ;    OP.    muksiya.      ft.    moksyati,   -te  (B.).      ps. 

mucyate ;    ao.    amoci ;    inj.    mooi ;    pp.    mukta.      gd. 

muktva  (B.) ;    -mueya.      inf.  moktum  (B.).     ds.  mu- 

muksati,  -te ;  moksate  (B.);  pt.  mumuksamana. 
mud  he  merr//,  I.  A.  :  pr.  modate.     pf.  mumoda.     ao.  root : 

OP.  mudimahi ;  is  :  prc.  A.  modisisthas.     ps.  ao.  amodi. 

INF.  mud6.    cs.modayati,  -te  (B.) ;  ds.  mrimodayisati(B.). 
mus  steal,  IX.  P. :  pr.  musnati ;  pt.  musnant ;  ipf.  amus- 

nas,  amusnat :   amusnitam..     P  P.  :  pr.  mosatha.     ao. 

is  :  inj.  mosis.     pp.  musita.     gd.  -miisya.     inf.  miis6. 
muh  he  dazed,  IV.  P. :  pr.   mvihyati.     pf.  mumoha  (B.). 

ao.  a  :  amuhat  (B.) ;   red.  :  dmumuhat.     ft.  mohisyati 

(B.).      pp.    miigdha ;    miidha  (AV.).      inf.   miih6.      cs. 

m.ohayati ;  gd.  mohayitva. 


LIST  OF  VEKBS  407 

murch,  mur  thicken,  I.  P. :  ipf.  amurchat.    pp.  murta  (B.). 

cs.  murchayati  (B.). 
1 .  mr  die,  I.  :  pk.  marati,  marate  ;  maramahe  ;  sb.  marati ; 

marama ;    A.    marai.       pf.    mamara ;    mamrur ;    px. 

mamrvams.     ao.  root :  amrta  ;    inj.  rarthas  ;  op.  mur- 

iya ;     red.  :  amimarat   (B.).      ft.  marisyati  (AV.).     ps. 

mriyate ;  pp.  mrta.     gd.  mrtva  (B.).     cs.  marayati. 
'1.  mr  crush,  IX.  P.  :  ipv.  mrnihi ;  pt.  mrnaat.     ps.  mur- 

yate  (B.) ;  pp.  murna  (AV.).     int.  ipv.  marmartu. 
mrc  injure  :  ao.  s  :  pkc.  mrksista.     pp.  mrkta.     cs.  marc- 

ayati ;  sb.  mar  cay  at. 
mrj  wi]_)e,  II.  :  pk.  marsti  ;  mrjanti ;  mrj6;  mrjmahe ;  ipv. 

marstu ;    A.  mrksva  ;    mrddhvam ;    pt.   mrj  ana ;    ipf. 

mrsta  (3.  s.  A.) ;  amrjata.     VII.  :  op.  mrnjyat  (B.) ;  ipv. 

inrnajani   (B.) ;    ipf.    mrnjata  (3.   pl.j.       pf,  mamarja; 

raamrjur  ;  mamrje  and  mamrje  ;  op.  m.amrjita.    ao.  sa  : 

amrksat ;  amrksama  ;  A.  amrksanta ;  ipv.  mrksatam ; 

red.:  amimrjanta   (B.) ;    s  :  amarksit  (B.)  ;   is:  amarjit 

(B.).     FT.  mraksyate  (B.),  marksyate  (B.);  mrasta  (B.). 

PS.  mrjyate ;    pp.  mrsta ;    gdv.  marjya.      gd.  mrstva ; 

marjitva  (B.)  ;  -mrjya.    inf. -mrjas  (B.).    cs.  marj ayati, 

-te;  marjayati,  -te  (B.).     int.  marmrjyate;    marimrj- 

yate  (B.);  sb,  marmrjat;  marmrjanta;  pt.  marmrjat ; 

marmrjana   and    marmrjana ;      marmrjyamaaa ;    ipf, 

marmrjma,  marmrjata. 
mrd  be  gracious,  VI. ;  pk.  mrdati ;  mrdate  (B.) ;  sb.  mrlati 

and  mrlat ;  ipv.  mrla  and  mrdatat  (AV.),  mrlatu.     pf. 

OP.  mamrdyur.     cs.  mrdayati. 
mm  crusli,  VI,  P.  :   pk.  mrnati ;  inj.  mrnat ;    ipv.  mrna. 

IPF.  amrnat.     ao.  root:  mrnyiir  (K.) ;  led.  :  amimrnan. 
mrd  crush :  ao.  pkc.  mrdyasam  (B.) ;   ft.  mardisyate  (B.). 

PS.  mrdyate  (B.) ;  pp.  mrdita.     gd.  -mrdya  (B.).     inf. 

marditos  (B.). 
mrdh  neglect,  I.  P.  :  pk.  mardhati.     VI. :  pk.  sb.  mrdhati. 

ao.  root :  op,  mrdhyas ;  is  :  sb,  mardhisat ;  inj.  mardh- 

is  :  mardhistam.     pp.  mrddha. 


408  ,         APPENDIX   1 

mrs  toudi,  VI. :  vn.  mrsati,  -te.  pf.  mamrsur ;  mamrs6 
(B.).  Ao.  sa :  amrksat ;  inj.  mrksas ;  mrksata  (2.  pi.), 
pp.  mrsta.  gd.  -mrsya.  inf.  -mrse.  cs.  marsayati  (B.). 
INT.  SB.  raarmrsat ;  ind.  marirarsyate  (B.). 

mrs  not  heed,  IV. :  pr.  mrsyate.  pf.  mamarsa.  ao.  root : 
INJ,  mrsthas  ;  a  :  inj.  mrsanta  ;  red. :  inj.  mimrsas  ;  is  : 
INJ.  marsisthas.     inf.  -mrse. 

med  be  fat,  IV.  P.  :  ipv.  medyantu.  VI.  A.  :  ipv.  medatam 
(3.  s.).     cs.  medayati. 

myaks  he  situated,  I.  P.  :  ipv.  myaksa.  pf.  mimyaksa  ; 
mimiksiir ;  A.  mimiksire.  ao.  root :  amyak ;  ps. 
amyaksi. 

mrad  crush,  I.  :  pr.  mradate ;  ipv.  mrada.  ft.  mradi- 
syati,  -te.     inf.  -mrade  (B.).     cs.  mradayati. 

mruc,  mluc  set,  I.  P. :  pr.  mrocati ;  mlocati  (B.) ;  pt. 
mrocant.  pf.  mumloca  (B.).  ao.  a:  amrucat  (B.). 
pp.  mrukta  (B.) ;  mliikta.     inf.  mviica. 

mla  relax,  IV.  P.:  pr.  mlayati  (B.).  pp.  mlata;  mlana 
(B.).     cs.  mlapayati. 

ya.^  sacrifice,  I.:  pr,  yajati,  -te;  sb.  yajati, -te;  op.  yajeta; 
ipv.  yajatu;    yajantam ;    pt.  yajant;    yajamana.     iff. 
ayajat;  ayajanta.     pf.  ije  (1.  3.  s.),  yeje  (3.  s.) ;  ijathe 
ijir6;   pi.  ijana.     ao.  root :  ipv.  yaksva  ;  red.:  ayiyajat 
(B.) ;  s:  ayas,  ayat;  s:  ayaksit ;  A.  ayasta  (3.  s.j ;  sb 
yaksat ;  du.  2.  yaksatas,  3.  yaksatam  ;  A.  yaksate  ;  inj 
yat  (2.  s.) ;  A.  yaksi  (1.  s.)  ;  op.  yaksiya  ;  sa  :  ipv.  yak 
satam  (3.  du.).     ft.  yaksyate  ;  yaksyati  (B.) ;  yasta  (B.) 
pp.  ista.     GD.  istva.     inf.  yajadhyai;  yajadhyai  (TS.) 
yastave ;  yastum.     cs.  yajayati  (B.).     us.  iyaksati,  -te  ; 
SB.  iyaksan  ;  pt.  iyaksant ;  iyaksamana. 

yat  stretch,  I. :  pr.  yatati,  -te ;  sb.  A.  yataite  (3.  du.) ;  op. 
yatema ;  yatemahi ;  ipv.  yatatam  ;  A.  yatasva ;  yatan- 
tam ;  pt.  yatant ;  yatamana.  i^f.  yetir6.  ao.  root  : 
pt.  yatana  and  yatana ;  is :  ayatista  (B.).  ft.  yatisyate 
(B.).  pp.  yatta.  gd.  -yatya  (B.).  cs.  yatayati,  -te; 
PS.  yatyate  (B.j. 


LIST   OF  VEKBS  409 

yam   stretch    out,    I. :    pr.  yaehati,   -te ;    sb.  yachat ;    oi\ 

yachet ;  ipv.  yacha  and  yachatat,  yachatu.    iff.  aya- 

chat ;  A.  ayachathas.     pf.  yayantha,  yayama ;  yema- 

thur,  yematur ;  yemima,  yema,  yemur ;  A.  yeni6  (3. 

s.) ;  yemate ;  yemir6  ;  pt.  yemana.    ao.  root :  yamam ; 

ayamur ;  sb.  yamas,  yamati  and  yamat ;   yaman ;  A. 

yamase,  yamate ;  op.  yamimahi  ;  pro.  yamyas  (3.  s.) ; 

IPV,   yandhi  ;    yantam ;    yanta   and    yantana ;    a  :  op. 

yamet ;    s :    ayamsam,    ayan   (3.  s.) ;   A.   ayamsi  (B.), 

ayamsta ;  ayamsata ;  sb.  yamsat ;  yamsatas  ;  yamsan  ; 

A.    yamsate ;     inj,   A.    yamsi ;      pt.    yamasana ;     is : 

yamista  (3.  s.  A.),     ft.  yamsyati  (B.).     ps.   y  amy  ate  ; 

AO.  ayami  (B.) ;  Pl^  yata;  gdv.  yamsenya.     gd.  -yatya. 

INF.    yamitavai,    yantave ;      yamam ;      yantum    (B.). 

c's.  yamayati ;  yamayati  (B.).     ds.  yiyamsati  (B.).     int. 

yamyamiti. 
yas  he  heated^  III.  P. :  ipv.  yayastu.     IV.  P.  :  pr.  yasyati. 

pp.  yasta;  yasita  (B.). 
ya  go,  II.  P.:  pr.   yati ;    yanti;    op.   yayam;    ipv.  yahi, 

yatii ;  yatam  ;  yata  and  yatana,  yantu ;  pt.  yant.     iff. 

ayas,  ayat ;  ayatam ;  ayama,  ayatana,  ayur  (B.).     pf. 

yayatha,  yayau ;   yayathur ;    yaya,  yayur ;    ft.  yayi- 

vams.     AO.  s  :  ayasam ;  ayasur  ;  sb.  yasat ;  inj.  yesam ; 

sis  :  ayasisam,  ayasit ;  ayasistam  ;  ayasista,  ayasisur ; 

SB.  yasisat ;  pro.  A.  yasisisthas ;  ipv.  yasistam ;  yasista. 

ft.   yasyati.      pp.    yata.      gd.   yatva  (B.)  ;    -yaya  (B.). 

inf.  yatave,  yatavai  (B.) ;  -yai.     cs.  yapayati  (B.). 
yac  asJc,  I. :    pr.   yacati,   -te.     pf.   yayace  (B.).     ao.   is : 

ayacit ;    ayacista  (B.) ;    sb.   yacisat ;    A.    yacisamahe. 

FT.  yacisyate.      pp.   yacita;    yacitva  and  yacya  (B.). 

INF.  yacitum.     cs.  yacayati. 

1.  yu  unite,  YI.:  pr.  yuvati,  -te.  II.  yauti;  A.  yut6  ; 
SB.  yavan ;  ipv.  yutam  (3.  s.  A.) ;  ft.  yuvana.  pf. 
yuyuv6.  PER.  FT.  yiivita  (B.).  pp.  yuta.  gd,  -ytiya.  ds. 
yuyusati.    int.  yoyuve  ;  ft.  yoyuvat  (AV.);  yoyiivana. 

2.  Y^  aejyanite,  III.:  pr.  yuyoti ;  sb.  yiiyavat;  inj.  yuyo- 


410  APPENDIX  I 


J. 


thas,  yuyota;  op.  yuyuyatam  ;  ipv.  yuyodhi,  yuy6tu; 

yuyutam  and  yuyotam  ;  yuyota  and  yuyotana.     I.  P. : 

PE.  yuchati  ;    ipv.  yiichantu  ;  pt.  yiichant.     ao.  root : 

SB.  yavanta  ;  op.  yuyat  (B.) ;  3.  du.  yuyatam  (B.) ;  pkc. 

yuyas  (3.  s.) ;  red.  :  inj.    yuyot ;  s:  yosati  and  yosat  ; 

yosatas ;    inj.  yusam  (AV.) ;    yaus  (2.  s.) ;    yaustam ; 

yausma,   yausta,  yausur ;    A.   yosthas  (B.) ;    is:   inj. 

yavis.    ps.  ao.  ayavi ;    pp.  yuta.     inf.  yotave,  yotavai ; 

yotos.      cs.   yavayati ;    yavayati.      int.    pt.  yoyuvat ; 

iPF.  ayoyavit;  pp.  yoyava. 
yuj  johi^   VII. :    yunakti ;    yunjanti ;    yunkte  ;    yunjate  ; 

SB.  yunajat;  yunajan;  A.  yunajate(3.  s.) ;  inj.  yufijata 

(3.  pi.) ;  IPV.  yundhi,  yunaktu ;  yunakta,  yufijantu  ;  A. 

yunksva,  yuntam  ;  2,  du.  yunjatham  ;  yungdhvam  ;  pt. 

yunjant;  yunjana ;  ipf.  ayunak  and  ayunak  ;  ayunjan  ; 

A.  ayunjata  (3.  pi.),     pf.  yuyoja ;  yuyujma  ;  A.  yiiyuj^  ; 

yuyiijr^ ;    sb.  A.  yuyojate  (3.  s.) ;    pt.  yuyujana.     ao. 

root:   A.  ayuji,  ayukthas,  ayukta ;    ayujmahi,  ayiig- 

dhvam,  yiijata  and  ayujran  ;  sb.  yojate ;  inj.  y6jam  ; 

A.  yukta  (3.  s.) ;  op.  yujyava,  yujyatam  ;  ipv.  yuksva ; 

PT.  yujana  ;  s. :  ayuksi ;  ayuksatam  (3.  du.) ;  ayuksata 

(3.  pi.),     ft.  yoksyati  (B.)  ;   yoksyate  ;  yokta  (B.).     ps. 

yujyate ;  ao.  ayoji ;  inj.  yoji ;  pp.  yukta.    gd.  yiiktva, 

yuktvaya.     inf.  yuje  ;  yoktum  (B.). 
yudh  figlit,  IV.  :  pr.  yudhyati,  -te  ;  sb.  y vidhyai.    IV.  :  ipv. 

yiidhya ;  pt.  yiidhyant ;  yvidhyamana ;  ipf.  ayudhyas, 

ayudhyat.     I.  P. :    pr.   yodhanti  (AV.).     II.   P.  yotsi 

(=  IPV.).     PF.  yuyodha  ;    yuyudhur  ;  A.  yuyudhate  (3. 

du.).     ao.  root :  sb.  yodhat ;   ipv.  yodhi ;    pt.  yodhana ; 

is  :  ayodhit ;  sb.  yodhisat ;  inj.  yodhis  ;  ipv.  yodhistam. 

FT.    yotsyati,    -te  (B.).      pp.    yuddha.      gdv.    yodhya, 

yudh^nya.      gd.    -yuddhvi.      inf.    yudh6,    yudhaye ; 

yudham.     cs.  yodhayati.     ds.  yuyutsati,  -te. 
yup  obstruct :   pf.  yuyopa ;    yiiyopima.      ao.   red. :    ayu- 
yupan  (B.).     pp.  yupita.     cs.  yopayati.      int.  yoyup- 

yate  (B.). 


LIST   OF   VERBS  411 

yes  he  heated,  I.  P.:  pr.  y6sati;  pt.  y6sant. 

ramh   hasten,    I. :    pr.    ramhate :    pt.   ramhamana.      ipp. 

aramhas;    A.  aramhata  (8.  s.).     pp.  pt.  rarahana.     cs. 

ramhayati,  -te. 
raks  p)ofect,  I. :    pr.  raksati,   -te.     pf.   raraksa ;  pt.   ra- 

raksana.     ao.  is  :  aiaksit ;   araksit  (B.)  ;  sb.  I'aksisas, 

raksisat.     pp.  raksita.     cs.  raksayate  (B.). 
raj  colour,  IV.  :  ipf.  arajyata.    pp.  rakta  (B.).    cs.  rajayati. 

INT.  rarajiti. 
rad  dig,  I.  :  pr,  radati,  -te  ;  in.j.  radat ;  ipv.  rada ;  radantu; 

A.   radantam  (3,  pi.) ;  pt.  radant.     ipf.  aradat,  radat. 

II.  P.  :  ratsi  (=  ipv.).     pf.  rarada.     pp.  radita. 
radh,  randh  maJx  suhjed,  IV.  P. :  ipv.  radhya,  radhyatu. 

j'F.  raradhur.     ao.  root:   ipv.  randhi   (=randdhi);  a: 

HB.  radhama ;    inj.   radham ;    red.  :    sb.   riradha ;    inj. 

riradhas,   riradhat ;    riradhatam  ;    riradhata  ;    is  :  inj. 

randhis.    pp.  raddha.    cs.  randhayati ;  sb.  randhayasi. 
ran  rejoice,  I.  :  pr.  ranati ;  inj.  rananta ;  ipv.  rana.     IV. 

P. :    PR.  ranyasi,  ranyati ;    ranyathas ;    ranyanti.     pf. 

rarana  (1.  s.)  ;  sb.  raranas,  raranat ;  raranata  (2.  pi.). 
•  INJ.  raran  (3.  s.) ;  ipv.  rarandhi;  raranta  (2.  pi.),  rarantu. 

ppF.  araranur.     ao.  is :  aranisur ;    inj.  ranistana.     cs. 

ranayati. 
rap  chatter,    I.   P. :  pr.   rapati ;    inj.   rapat ;    op.  rapema. 

IPF.  arapat.     int.  rarapiti. 
raps  hefidl,  I.  A. :  rapsate;  rapsante.     pf.  rarapse. 
rabh,  rambh  grasj),  I.  :   pr.  rabhate.     pf.  rarabhma ;  A. 

rarabh^  ;  rebhird ;  pt.  rebhana.   ao.  s  :  3.  s.  A.  arabdha  ; 

pt.  rabliasana.    pp.  rabdha.  gd.  -rabhya.    inf.  -rabham ; 

-rabhe.     cs.  rambhayati,  -te  (B,).     ds.  ripsate  (B.). 
ram  rejoice,  I.  A.  :  pr.  ramate.     IX.  P.  :    ipf.  aramnas, 

aramnat.      ao.   red. :    ariramat ;    sb.   riramama ;    inj. 

riraman  ;  s :  A.  aramsta  (3.  s.) ;  aramsata  (3.  pi.) ;  inj. 

ramsthas ;  sis :  inj.  ramsisam.     ft.  ramsyate ;  -ti  (B.). 

pp.  rata  (B.).      gd.  ratva  (B.j.      inf.  rantos  (B.).      cs. 

ramayati  and  ramayati. 


412  APPENDIX   1 

1.  va  give,  III.:  ipv.  ririhi;  A.  rarasva  (AV.) ;  raratham 
(3.  du.) ;  raridhvam ;  sb,  rarate  ;  pt.  rarana.  II.  :  pr. 
rasi  (=ipv.) ;  rate  (B.);  pf.  rarima;  rare  (1.  s.),  rarise ; 
rarathe  ;  pt.  rarivams  ;  rarana.  ao.  root :  aradhvam  ; 
IPV.  rasva;  s:  arasma ;  arasata  (3.  pi.);  sb.  rasat ; 
rasan ;  A.  rasate  (3.  s.) ;  op.  rasiya;  ipv.  A.  rasatam 
(3.  s.) ;  rasatham  (2.  du.) ;  rasantam  (3.  pi.) ;  pp.  rata. 

2.  ra  barJc,  IV.  P. :  pr.  rayasi ;  ipv.  raya ;  pt.  rayant. 

raj  rule,  I.  P.  :  pr.  rajati.     II.  P.  :  pr.  rasti  ;  inj.  rat.     ao. 

is :  arajisur,     inf.  rajase.     cs.  rajayati  (B.),  -te. 
radh  succeed,  IV.  A.  :  ipv.  radhyatam  ;  pt.  radhyamana. 

V.  P. :  PR.  radhnoti  (B.).    pf.  raradha.    ao.  root :  aradh- 

am.   (B.)  ;    sb.    radhat    and    radhati ;    radhama ;    i'rc. 

radhyasam  ;     radhyasma  ;    red.  :    ariradhat    (B.) ;    s  : 

aratsis ;    is  :  inj.  radhisi  (1.  s.).     ft.  ratsyati.     ps.   a.o. 

aradhi ;    pp.  raddha  ;    gdv.  radhya.     gd.  raddhva  (B.). 

-radhya  (B.).     inf.  iradhyai.     cs.  radhayati. 
ri  floir,   IX. :  pr.  rinati  ;    rinithas  ;    rinanti ;    A.  rinit6  ; 

rinate ;    inj.  rinas ;    rinan ;    pt.  rinant ;   rinana.     ipf. 

rinas,  arinat ;    arinitam  ;    arinita.      IV. :    pr.   riyate ; 

riyante ;  pt.  riyamana. 
ric  leave,  VII.  P. :    pr.   rinakti ;  sb.  I'inacava ;   inj.  rinak 

(3.  s.).     ipf.   arinak  (2.  s.) ;    rinak  (3.  s.).     pf.   rir^ca  ; 

riricathur ;  A.  ririkse,  ririce  ;    riricathe ;   riricr6  ;  op. 

riricyam,    riricyat ;    pt.    ririkvams ;    riricana.       ppf. 

arirecit.     ao.  root :    inj.   A.  rikthas ;    ipv.  riktam  ;    s : 

araik  (3.  s.) ;  A.  ariksi  ;  red. :  ariricat  (B.).    ft.  reksyate 

(B.).     PS.  ricyate ;  ipf.  aricyata  ;   ao.  areci ;   pp.  rikta. 

cs.  recayati  (B.). 
rip  smear  :  pf.  riripiir.     pp.  ripta.     Cp.  lip. 
I'ibh  sing,  I.  P. :  pr.  r^bhati ;  rebhanti ;  pt.  r^bhant.    ipf. 

r6bhat.     pf.  rir^bha.     ps.  ribhyate. 
ris  tear,  VI. :  pr.   risamahe ;    ipv.  risantam ;    pt.  risant. 

pp.  rista. 
x'is  he  hurt,  IV.  :  pi;,  risyati ;  sb.  risyas,  risyati  and  risyat ; 

OP.  risyet ;  risyema.     I.  P.:  sb.  r6sat;  inj.  resat.     ao. 


LIST   OF  VERBS  413 

a :  arisan  ;  bb.  risama,  risatha  and  risathana ;  tt.  risant 
and  risant ;  red. :  in  J.  ririsas,  ririsat ;  ririsata  (2.  pi.) ; 
OP.  ririses ;  pec.  A.  ririsista  and  ririsista  (3.  s.).  pp. 
rista.  INF.  ris6  ;  risas.  cs.  resayati ;  inf.  risayadhyai. 
Ds.  ririksati. 
rih  llch,  II.:  pe.  r^dhi ;  rihanti ;  3.  pi.  rihate  and 
rihat6 ;  ft.  rihant ;  rihana  (VS.)  and  rihana.  pp.  pt. 
ririhvams.  pp.  ridha.  int.  rerihyate ;  pt.  r^rihat ; 
rerihana.     Cp.  lib. 

1.  rti  cry,  VI.  P.:  pe.  ruvati ;  inj.  ruvat ;  ipv.  ruva;  ft. 
rtivant.  II.  (B.)  rauti ;  ruvanti.  pf.  ruruvird  (B.). 
AO.  is  :  aravit ;  aravisui'.  pp.  ruta.  int.  roraviti  ;  ft. 
roruvat;  roruvana  (B.)  ;  ipf.  aroravit. 

2.  ru  Ireal; :  ao.  is  :  ravisam.     pp.  ruta.     int.  pt.  r6ruvat. 
rue  shhie,  I.  :  pe.  rocate.     pf.  ruroca ;  rurucur  ;  ruruc6 

(3.  s.) ;  iN.i.  rurueanta;  op.  rurucyas ;  pt.  rurukvams; 

rurucana.     ao.  root :    ft.  i-ucana  ;    red. :  arurucat ;    A. 

arurucata  (3.  s.,  B.) ;  is  :  A.aroeista  (3.  s.) ;  op.  rucisiya 

(AV.)  and  rocisiya  (B.).     ps.  ao.  aroci.     pp.  rucita  (B.). 

INF.  ruc6.     cs.  rocayati ;  -te  (B.).     int.  pt.  rorucana. 
ruj  hreal;,  I.  P. :  pe.   rujati.     pf.  rurojitha,   ruroja.     ao. 

root:  inj.   rok ;  red.:  arurujatam  (2.  du.).     pp.  rugna. 

GD.  ruktva  (B.) ;  -riijya  (B.j.     inf.  -riije. 
rud  tveep,  II.  P.  :  pe.  roditi ;    rudanti ;    sb.  rodat  (Kh.) ; 

ft.    rudant.      ipf.    arodit   (B.).      ao.    a:    arudat.       cs. 

rodayati. 
1.  rudh  obstnict,  VII. :  PE.runadhmi,  ru]^addhi ;  A.rundh6 

(=  runddh6) ;  rundhate  (3.  pi.)  ;  sb.  A.  runadhamahai ; 

IPV.  rundhi  (=  runddhi) ;  A.  rundham  (=  runddham, 

3.  s.) ;  ft.  rundhana ;   iff.  A.  arundhata  (3.  pi.),     pp. 

rurodhitha ;  A.  rurudhre.   ao.  root :  arodham  ;  arudh- 

ma  ;    a  :  arudhat ;    arudhan  ;    inj.  rudhat ;    ft.  rudh- 

ant ;    s :  araut ;  arautsit  (B.) ;  A.  arutsi  (B.),  aruddha 

(B.).     FT.  rotsyati, -te  (B.).     ps.  rudhyate  ;  pp.  ruddha. 

GD.   -riidhya.     inf.   -riidham,  rundham  (B.),  -rodham 

(B.);  roddhos  (B.).     cs.  riirutsate  (B.). 


414  APPENDIX    I 

2.  rudh  gi'oir,  I.  P. :  pr.  r6dhati  ;  in.t.  rodhat. 

I'up  hreah,  IV.  P. :  pr.  rupyati  (B.).     ao.  red. :  arurupat. 

pp.  rupita.     cs.  ropayati  (B.). 
ruh  ascend,  I. :  pr.  rohati,  -te.     pp.  rurohitha,  ruroha  ; 

ruruhiir.     ao.  root :  pt,  ruhana  ;    a  :  aruham,  aruhas, 

aruhat ; '  aruhama,  aruhan ;    sb.  ruhava ;    inj.  ruham, 

ruhat ;  op.  ruh^ma ;  ipv.  ruha ;  ruhatam  ;  sa  :  ruksas, 

aruksat ;    aruksama.      ft.   roksyati  (B.).      pp.  rudha. 

GD.    rudhva,    -riihya.      inf.  -ruham ;    rohisyai   (TS.) ; 

rodhum  (B.).      cs.   rohayati ;   -te  (B.) ;    ropayati  (B.). 

DS.  ruruksati. 
rej  tremble.  I.  :  pr.  r^jati,  -te;  inj.  r^jat;  r^janta  (3.  pi.); 

PT.   r6jamana ;    iff.   arejetam  (3.  du.)  ;    arejanta.     cs. 

rejayati. 
lap  prate,  I.  P. :  pr.  lapati ;  pt.  lapant.     ft.  lapisyati  (B,). 

pp.  lapita.     cs.  lapayati ;  -te  (B.).     int.  lalapiti. 
labh  tahe,  I.  A.  :  pr.  labhate.     pf,  lebhird  ;  pt.  lebhana. 

AO.  s  (B.) :  A.  alabdha ;  alapsata.     ft.  lapsyati,  -te  (B.). 

PS.  labhyate  (B.) ;  pp.  labdha.     gd.   labdhva ;  -labhya 

(B.).   cs.  lambhayati,  -te  (B.).     ds.  lipsate ;  lipsate  (B.) ; 

PS.  lipsyate  (B.). 
likh  scratch,  VI.:  pr.  likhati;  -te  (B.).     pf.  Iil6kha  (B.). 

AO.  red.  :    alilikhat  (B.)  ;    is  :  inj.  16khis.     pp.  likhita. 

GD.  -likhya  (B.). 
lip  smear,  VI.  P.  :  pr.   limpati.     pf.   Iil6pa,   lilipur  (B.). 

AO.  s  :  alipsata  (3.  pi.),     ps.  lipyate  (B.) ;  pp.  lipta.     gd. 

-lipya  (B.). 
lib  Ikh,  II.  :_pr.  16dhi  (B.).  cs.  lehayati,   int.  pp.  lelihita(B.). 
ii  cling,  I.  A. :  pr.  layate  ;  ipv.  layantam.     pf.  lilye  (B.); 

lilyiir ;    -layam  cakre.      ao.  s  :    alesta  (B.).     pp.   lina. 

cs.  lapayati  (B.).    int.  lelayati ;  pf.  lelaya. 
lup  break,  VI.  P. :  pr.  lumpati ;  op.  lumpet.     ps.  lupyate  ; 

pp.  lupta.     GD.  -liipya.     cs.  lopayati,  -te  (B.). 
lubh  desire,   IV.  P.  :    pr.   liibhyati.     ao.  red. :  aiuJubhat 

(B.).     pp.    lubdha   (B.).      cs.    lobhayati ;    ds.    liilobha- 

yisati  (B.). 


LIST   OP  VERBS  415 

lu  etit  (B.),  IX.  P.  :  PR.   lunati.     V.  P.  :  pr.  Iun6ti.     pp. 

luna. 
vaks  increase  (=2.  uks):  pf.  vavaksitha,  vavaksa;    va- 

vaksatur  ;    vavaksiir ;    A.   vavakse ;    vavaksir6.      ppf. 

vavaksat.     cs.  vaksayati. 
vac  speali,  III.  P,  :  pr.  vivakmi,  vivakti ;  ipv.  vivaktana. 

PF.   uvaktha,    uvaea   and   vavaca ;    ueima,  uciir ;    A. 

ueis6  ;  pt.  ucana.     ao.  root :  prc.  ucyasam  (B.) ;  red.  : 

avocat ;  sb,  v6ca,  vocasi,  vocati  and  vocati ;  vocama  ; 

A.  voeavahai ;  inj.   vocam,  v6cas,   vocat ;  vocan ;  A. 

voce  ;  vocanta ;  op.  voc^yam,  voc^s,  voe^t ;  voc6tam ; 

voc6ma,  voc6yur  ;  A.  voc^ya ;  voc^mahi ;  ipv.  vocatat, 

vocatu ;  vocatam ;  vocata.     ft,  vaksyati ;  co.  avaksyat 

(B.) ;   vakta  (B.).     ps.   ueyate ;    ao.    avaci;    pp.  ukta; 

GDV.  vacya.     go.  uktva(B.) ;  -ucya(B.).     inf.  vaktave; 

-vaee  ;    vaktum  (B.) ;   vaktos  (B.).     cs.  vacayati  (B.). 

DS.  vivaksati,  -te  (B.).     int.  ipf.  avavacit. 
vaj  he  strong ;  cs.   strengthen  :   pr.  vajayamas,   -masi ;    A. 

vajayate;  ipv.  vajaya;  pt.  vajayant. 
vane  move  croohedly,  I.  P. :  pr.  vaneati.     pf.  vavakr6.     ps. 

vacyate. 
vat  apprehend,  I. :  pr.  op.  vatema ;  pt.  vatant.     ao.  red. : 

avivatan.     cs.  vatayati. 
vad  speal-,   I. :  pr.   vadati,   -te ;    sb.   vadani,   vadasi   and 

vadas,  vadati ;  vadathas ;  vadama,  vadan ;  inj.  vadat ; 

OP.  vadet ;  A.  vadeta ;  ipv.  vada,  vadatu ;  A.  vadasva  ; 

vadadhvam ;  pt.  vadant.     ipf.  avadan  ;  A.  avadanta. 

PF.  udima;  ud6  (B.).     ao.  root:  prc.  udyasam  (B.);  is: 

avadisam;  avadisur;  A.  avadiran  (AV.);  sb.  vadisas; 

INJ.  vadisur.     ft.  vadisyati ;  -te  (B.).     ps.  udyato  ;  pp. 

udita.     GD. -udya(B.),     inf.  vaditum(B.) :  vaditos  (B.). 

cs.  vadayati,  -te  (B.) ;  ps.  vadyate  (B.).     ds.  vivadisati 

(B,).     int.   vavaditi;   ipv.  vavaditu;   pt.   vavadat;   A. 

vavadyate  (B.). 
vadh  slay,  I.    P. :  op.   vadheyam,    vadhet ;    ipv.    vadha. 

ao.   root :    prc.   vadhyasam ;    op.   vadhyat  (B.)  ;    is :    a- 


416  APPENDIX   I 

vadhisam  and  vadhim,  avadhis,  avadhit  and  vadhit ; 

avadhisma ;  sb.  vadhisas ;  inj.  vadhis,  vadhit ;  vadh- 

ista  and  vadliistana  (2.  pi.),  vadhisur  ;  A.  vadhisthas ; 

ipv.  vadhistam  (2.  du.). 
van  ivin,  VIII.  :  pr.  vanosi,  vanoti ;  vanuthas  ;  A.  vanve, 

vanut6  ;  sb.  vanavat ;    A.  vanavase  ;    in.t.  vanvan  ;  op. 

vanuyama  ;    ipv.  vanvantu  ;    A.   vanusva,   vanutam  ; 

vanudhvam,  vanvatam ;  pt.  vanvant;    vanvand ;    ipf. 

avanos ;    avanvan ;    A.    avanvata.      VI.    and   I. :    pe. 

vanati  and  vanati ;    A.   vanase,  vanate  ;    sb.   vanati ; 

vanas  ;  vanava ;  A.  vanamahai ;  inj.  vanas ;  A.  vanta 

(=vananta);    op.    van6s;    van6ma ;    van^mahi ;    ipv. 

vanatam  ;  vanata ;  A.  vanatam  (3.  s.).     pf.  vavantha, 

vavana ;    vavanma ;    A.  vavn6  ;    sb.  vavanat ;  ipv.  va- 

vandhi  ;    pt.  vavanvams.     ao.  root :  vamsva ;  sb.  vam- 

sat ;  vamsama;    A.  vamsate ;    inj.  vamsi;   op.  vamsi- 

mahi  and  vasimahi ;    is :    sb.  vanisat ;    A.   vanisanta. 

pro.    vanisista ;    sis :    op.    vamsisiya.     pp.    -vata.     inf. 

-vantave.     cs.  vanayantu.     ds.  vivasati  ;  sb.  vivasat. 
vand  greet,  I.  A. :  pr.  vandate.   pf.  vavanda  ;  vavandima ; 

A.   vavande ;    vavandir6.       ao.  is :    op.  vandisimahi. 

PS.    AG.    vandi ;     pp.     vandita ;     gdv.    vandya.       inf. 

vandadhyai. 
vap  streiv,   I. :  pr.  vapati,  -te.     pf.  upathur ;    A.  upis6, 

up6   (3.   s.).      AO.   s:    avapsit    (B.).     ft.    vapsyati  (B.). 

PS.    upyate  ;    ao.    vapi ;    pp.    upta.      gd.    -lipya.      cs. 

vapayati  (B.). 
vam  vomit,  II. :    sb.  vaman.     ipf.  avamit ;    avamat  (B.). 

pp.  uvama  (B.).     ao.  s:  avan  (B.).     pp.  vanta  (B.). 
valg  leai),  I.  P.  :  pr.  valganti.     ipf.  avalgata  (2.  pi.),     pt. 

valgant. 
vas  desire,  II. :  pr.  vasmi,  vaksi,  vasti ;  usmasi  and  smasi, 

usanti ;    ipv.   vastu ;    pt.  iisant ;    usana.      I.   P. :    pr. 

yasanti  ;  sb.  vasama ;  inj.  vasat ;  ipf.  avasat.     III.  P^ : 

PR.  vavaksi;   vivasti;    ipv.  vivastu.     pf.  vavasiir;  A. 

vavase ;  pt.  vavasana. 


LIST   OF  VERBS  417 

1.  vas  shinr,  VI.  P.  :  i>r.  iichati;  sb.  uchat ;  uchan;  inj. 
uchat ;  op.  uchdt ;  ipv.  ucha,  uchatu  ;  uchata,  tichantu  ; 
FT.  uchant;  iff.  auchas  auchat.  ff.  uvaaa;  usa  (2. 
pi),  usiir;  ft.  f.  ususi  (TS.).  ao.  root:  avas  (2.  3.  s.)  ; 
A.  avasran ;  s  :  avat  (3.  s.).  co.  avatsyat  (B.).  ff.  usta. 
INF.  vastave.     cs.  vasayati. 

2.  vas  ivear,  II.  A. :  fr.  vaste ;  vasathe  ;  vasate  (3.  pi.) ; 
INJ.  vasta  (3.  s.) ;  vasata  (3.  pi.) ;  of.  vasimahi ;  ipv. 
vasisva,  vastam  (3.  s.) ;  vasatham  (TS.) ;  ft.  vasana; 
IFF.  avasthas ;  avasta.  ff.  vavas6 ;  ft.  vavasana. 
AO.  is :  avasista  (3.  s.).  cs.  vasayati,  -te ;  ft.  vas- 
ayisyate. 

3.  vas  dwell,  I.:  pr.  vasati;  vasate  (B.).  ff.  usatur; 
usima ;  ft.  fisivams ;  vavasana.  fer.  -vasam  cakre  (B.). 
AO.  root  :  vasana ;  red. :  avivasat ;  s :  avatsis.  ft. 
vatsyati  (B.).  gd.  usitva(B.);  -usya(B.).  ds.  vivatsatl 
(B.).     cs.  vasayati,  -te;  fs.  vasyate  (B.). 

vah  carry,  I.  :  fr.  vahati,  -te.  ff.  uvaha ;  uhathur,  uha- 
tur  ;  lihur  ;  A.  iihis6  ;  uhire.  ao.  root :  of.  uMta ;  ifv. 
volham  (2.  du.),  volham;  A.  vodhvam ;  ft.  xihana;  s: 
avat,  vat ;  avaksur ;  sb.  vaksas,  vaksati  and  vaksat ; 
vaksathas,  vaksatas ;  vaksan ;  inj.  vaksit.  ft.  vak- 
syati ;  vodha  (B.).  fs.  uhyate ;  ff.  udha.  gd.  udhva 
(B.)  ;  -lihya.  inf.  vodhum  ;  vddhave,  vodhavai  (B.) ; 
-vahe ;  vahadhyai.  cs.  vahayati  (B.) ;  int.  vani- 
vahyate  (B.). 

1.  va  hloiv,  II.  P.  :  fr.  vami,  vati ;  vatas  ;  vanti ;  ipv. 
vahi,  vatu ;  ft.  vant ;  iff.  avat.  IV.  P. :  pk.  vayati ; 
vayatas;  vayanti.  pf.  vavau  (B.).  ao.  sis:  avasit  (B.). 
cs.  vapayati. 

2.  va  weave,  IV. :  fr.  vayati ;  vayate  (B.) ;  ipv.  vaya ; 
vayata ;  ft.  vayant ;  iff.  avayat ;  avayan.  pf.  Qvur. 
ft.  vayisyati.  fs.  iiyate  (B.) ;  pp.  uta.  inf.  6tuin ; 
otave,  otavai;  vatave  (AV.). 

vajaya  desire  booty,  den. :  pr.  ft.  vajayant. 
vanch  desire,  I.  P. :  ipv.  vanehantu. 
1819  E  e 


418  APPENDIX    I 

vas  bellow,  I.   P. :  pr.  vasati.     IV.  A. :  pr.  vasyate.     pf. 

vavasir6  and  vavasr6  ;  pt.  vavasana.     ppf.  avavasitam 

(3.  du.) ;    avavasanta.     ao.   red. :    avivasat ;    avivasan  ; 

A.   avivasanta ;    is :    A.  avasisthas  (B.).     int.    pt.   va- 

va^at.     cs.  vasayati. 
vie  sift,  VII.  P. :  pr.  vificanti ;  ipv.  vinaktu ;  pt.  vincant ; 

iPF.  avinak.     III.  P. :  pr.  viveksi.     pf.  pt.  vivikvams. 

PS.  vicyate  ;  pp.  vikta  (B.). 
vij  tremhle,  VI.  :  pr.  vijante  ;  ipv.  vijantam  ;  pt.  vijamana ; 

IPF.    avije.     pp.  vivijr6.       ao.    root :    in.i.   A.   vikthas, 

vikta;  red.:  inj.  vivijas.     ps.  vikta,     cs.  vejayati  (B.). 

INT.  vevijyate  ;  pt.  v6vijana. 

1.  vid  Icnoiv,  II.  P.  :  pr.  vidmas ;  se.  vddas,  vedati  and 
v6dat ;  v6dathas ;  op.  vidyam,  vidyat ;  vidyatam ; 
vidyama,  vidyur ;  ipv.  viddhi  and  vittat,  v6ttu ;  vittam. 
IPF.  avedam,  avet  and  v^t ;  avidur  (B.).  pf.  v6da  (1.  3.), 
v6ttha ;  vidathur  ;  vidma,  vida,  vidur ;  A.  vidmahe 
(B.),  vidr6  ;  per.  vidam  cakara  (B.) ;  pt.  vidvams.  ao. 
is:  avedit(B.);  per.  vidam  akran  (B.).  ft.  vedisyati, 
-te  (B.) ;  vedita  (B.).  pp.  vidita.  gd.  viditva.  inf. 
vidmane ;  v^ditum  (B.) ;  v6ditos  (B.).  cs.  vedayati, 
-te.     DS.  vividisati  (B.). 

2.  vid  find,  VI. :  pr.  vindati,  -te.  II.  vits6,  vid6  (3.  s.) ; 
vidr6  ;  ipv.  viddhi ;  A.  3.  s.  vidam  ( AV.) ;  pt.  vidana 
and  vidana.  pf.  viv6ditha,  viv6da ;  vividathur ;  vi- 
vidiir ;  A.  vivid6,  vivits^ ;  vividr6  and  vividrir6 ;  sb. 
vividat ;  pt.  vividvams.  ao.  a :  avidam,  avidas, 
avidat ;  avidama,  avidan ;  A.  avidanta ;  sb.  vidas, 
vidat ;  vidathas  ;  vidatha ;  inj.  vidam,  vidas,  vidat ; 
vidan;  A.  vidata(3.  s.) ;  vidanta;  op.  vid^yam,  vid6t ; 
vid6ma ;  A.  vid6ya;  prc.  videsta  (AV.);  ipv.  vidatam; 
pt.  vidant ;  s  :  A.  avitsi.  ft.  vetsyati,  -te  (B.).  ps. 
vidyate ;  ao.  avedi,  v6di ;  pp.  vitta ;  vinna.  gdv. 
vidayya.  gd.  vittva,  -vidya  (B.).  inf.  vid6,  v6ttave ; 
v6ttos  (B.).  DS.  vivitsati  (B.).  int.  sb.  v6vidama.  pt. 
v6vidat;  v6vidana. 


LIST   OF  VERBS  419 

vidh  worship,  VI.  :  sb.  vidhati ;    int.  vidhat ;    vidhan  ;   A. 

vidhanta ;    op.    vidh6ma  ;    vidh^mahi  ;    pt.   vidhant ; 

ipp.  avidhat. 
vip  tremble,  I.  :  pr.  v^pate ;  pt.  v^pamana ;  ipf.  avepanta. 

PF.  vivipr6.    Ao.  root :  pt.  vipana  ;  red. :  avivipat ;  is  : 

avepista  (B.).     cs.  vepayati,  vipayati. 
vis  e}der,Nl. :  pr.  visati,  -te.     pf.  vivesa  (1.  3,),  viv^sitha; 

vivisiir  and  (once)  vivesur ;  A.  vivisr6 ;  op.  vivisyas ; 

PT.   vivisivams  (TS.),  -visivams  (AV.).     ppf.   avivesis, 

AC.  root:  A.  avisran ;  s:  aviksmahi,  aviksata  (3  pi.); 

is:    iNJ.    v^sit ;    sa :    aviksat   (B.).      ft.   veksyati  (B.) 

pp.  vista.     GD.  -visya.     inf.  -visam ;  v^stavai  (B.).     cs. 

vesayati,  -te. 
vis  he  active,  III.  :  pr.  viveksi,  vivesti ;  vivistas ;  vivis- 

mas ;  sb.  vivesas ;  ipv.  vividdhi ;  ipf.  avives  and  viv6s 

(2.  s.),  viv6s   (3.   s.).      I.  P.  :  pt.  v^sant ;    ipf.  avesan. 

PF.  vivdsa ;    vivisiir.     ppf.  avivesis.      ao.  is :   v6sisas. 

FT.  veksyati,  -te  (B.).     ps.  visyate  (B.) ;  pp.  vista,     gd. 

vistvi ;    -visya.     inf.   -vise.     int.  v6vesnii ;    vevisyate 

(B.) ;  OP.  vevisyat ;  pt.  v^visat ;  v^visana. 
vist,  vest  wrap,  I.  P. :  ipv.  v^statam  (3.  du.).     pp.  vistita. 

cs.  vestayati,  -te  (B.). 
vi   enjoy,    II. :    vemi,    v6si,    v6ti ;    vlthas ;    vyanti ;    sb. 

vayati ;  in.t.  v6s  ;  ipv.  vihi,  vihi  and  vitat,  v6tu ;  vitam  ; 

vyantu ;  pt.  vyant ;  vyana.     ipf.  avyan.     pf.  vivaya ; 

vivy6.     ao.  s.  :  sb.  v^sat.     ps.   viyate.     pp.   vita.     inf. 

vitaye.     int.  veveti ;  veviyate. 
vid  maTxC  strong  :    cs.   sb.   vilayasi ;    ipv.   vilayasva.      pp. 

vilita. 
1.  vr  cover,  V.:  pr.  vrnoti;  A.  vrnv6;  vrnvate  and  vrn- 

vat6 ;  PT.  vrnvant ;  ipf.  avrnos,  avrnot ;  A.  avrnvata 

(8.  pi.) ;  PR.  urn6mi,   urnoti ;    iirnuthas,  urnutas ;    A. 

iirnus6,  urnute  ;  inj.  urnot ;  ipv.  iirnuhi  and  urnu,  iir- 

notu ;  urnuta,  iirnuvantu ;  A.  urnusva  ;  pt.  iirnuvant  ; 

iirnvana  ;  ipf.  aurnos,  aurnot.      I.  :  pr.  varathas  ;    A. 

varate  ;    varethe ;   varante ;    sb.  varate ;    inj.  varanta. 

Ee2 


420  APPENDIX   I 

IX. :   iPF.   avrnldhvam  (AV.).      pp.  vavartha,  vavara  ; 

vavriir ;   A.  vavr6 ;   pf.  vavrvams.    ppf.  avavarit.     ao. 

root:  vam  (=  varam),  avar  and  var  (2.  3.  s.) ;  avran  ; 

A.  avrta  ;  int.  var  (2.  3.  s.) ;  vran  ;  ipv.  vrdhi ;  vartam ; 

varta ;  vrana ;  red. :  avivaran  ;  A.  avivarata  (3.  s.) ;  s : 

SB.  varsathas ;  is  :  avarit  (B.).     ps.  ao.  avari ;    pp.  vrta. 

GD.  vrtva,  vrtvi ;  vrtvaya ;  -vrtya.     inf.  vartave.     cs. 

varayati, -te ;  ds.  vivarayisate  (B,).     int.  avarivar. 
2.  vr  cJioose,  IX.  A.  :  pr.  vrn6,  vrnis6,  vrnit6 :  vrnimahe, 

vrnate  ;  inj.  vrnita  (3.  s.) ;   op.  vrnita  ;  ipv.  vrnisva ; 

vrnidhvam,  vrnatam ;  pt.  vrnana  ;  ipf.  avrni,  avrnita  : 

avrnimahi.      pf.  vavrs6 ;    vavrmahe.     ao.   root :    avri, 

avrta;  sb.  varas,  varat;  varanta;  inj.  vrta  (3.  s.);  op. 

vurita  (3.  s.) ;  pt.  urana;  s  :  avrsi ;  avrdhvam  (B.),  avr- 

sata.   FT.  varisyate  (B.).    pp.  vrta.    gdv.  varya ;  varenya. 
vrj  twist,  VII. :  pr.  vrnaksi,  vrnakti ;  vrnjanti ;  A.  vrnj6, 

vrnkt6  ;    vrfijate ;    vrnjate  ;    sb.  vrnajan ;  ipv.  vrndhi, 

vrnaktu ;  vrnkta,  vrnjantu ;  A.  vrhksva.    ipf.  avrnak 

(2.  3.  s.) ;   avrnjan.     pp.  vavrjiir  ;  A.  vavrj6  ;  op.  vavrj- 

yiir ;  ipv.  vavrktam  (2,  du.) ;  pt.  f.  vavarjiis-i ;  (a-)varjusi 

(AV.).     AO.  root :  vark  (2.  3,  s.),  avrk  (AV.) ;    avrjan ; 

A.  avrkta  ;  sb.  varjati ;  varjate  ;  inj.  vark ;  op.  vrjyam  ; 

vrjyama ;    prc.   vrjyas  (3.  s.) ;     ipv.  varktam  (2.  du.) ; 

s  :  avarksis  (B.)  ;    A.  avrksmahi ;    inj.  A.  vrksi ;    sa : 

avrksam.      ft.   varksyati,  -te  (B.).      ps.   vrjyate ;    pp. 

vrkta.      GD.  vrktvi;    -vrjya.      inf.   -vrje ;    vrjadhyai; 

vrnjase.      cs.   varjayati.      ds.  vivrksate  (B.).      int.  pt. 

varivrjat ;  cs.  pt.  varivarjayant  (AV.). 
vrt  turn,  I.  A.  :  vartate.  pf.  vavarta  and  vavarta ;  vavrtur ; 

A.   vavrt6 ;    sb.  vavartati,  vavartat  and  vavrtat ;    op. 

vavrtyam,  vavrtyas,  vavrtyat ;  ipv.  vavrttana  (2.  pi.) ; 

PT.  vavrtvams.    ppf.  avavrtran ;  A.  avavrtranta.     ao. 
.     root  :     avart  ;    A.    avrtran  ;     sb.    vartat ;     ipv.    varta 

(=  vartta,  2.   pi.);    a:    avrtat;    red.:  avivrtat;    s:  A. 

avrtsata.   ft.  vartsyati ;  vartita  (B.).   co.  avartsyat  (B.), 

pp.  vrtta.     GD.   -vrtya.      inf.   -vrte;    -vrtas   (B.).      cs. 


LIST  OF   VEKBS  421 

vartayati,   -te ;    ps.   vartyate  (B.) ;   inf.  vartayadhyai. 

Ds.  vivrtsati;  -te  (B.).     int.  varvarti  (=  varvartti)  and 

varivarti  (=  varivartti) ;  varvrtati  (3.  pi.) ;  A.  varivrt- 

yate   (B.) ;  ipf.  avarivar  (3.  s.) ;  avarivur  (3.  pi.). 
vrdh  grow,   I. :    pr.   vardhati,    -te.      pf.   vavardha ;    va- 

vrdhatur ;    vavrdhur ;    A.    vavrdh6 ;    vavrdhate ;    sb. 

vavrdhati ;      A.    vavrdhate ;      op.    vavrdhithas ;     ipv. 

vavrdhasva ;    pt.  vavrdhvams ;    A.  vavrdhana.      ppf. 

vavrdhanta.      ao.  a :    avrdham,   avrdhat ;    vrdhama, 

avrdhan  ;    pt.   vrdhant ;    vrdhana ;   red.  :   avivrdhat ; 

avivrdhan ;   A.  avivrdhadhvam,   avivrdhanta ;   s :   pt. 

vrdhasana ;    is  :    op.  vardhisimahi.      pp.  vrddha.     inf. 

vrdh6 ;    vrdhase ;    vavrdhadhyai   (pp.).       cs.   vardha- 

yati,  -te.     int.  gdv.  vavrdh6nya. 
vrs  rain,  I.  P. :  pr.  varsati ;    ipv.  varsantu ;    pt.  varsant. 

VI.  A.  :  vrsasva ;  vrs^tham  (2.  du.).     pf.  ipv.  vavrsasva ; 

pt.  vavrsana.     ao.   s  :  avarsis,  avarsit.     ft.  varsisyati 

(B.)  ;   vrasta  (MS.),     pp.  vrsta.     gd.  vrstvi ;  vrstva(B.); 

-varstos  (B.).     cs.  varsayati. 
vrh  tear,  VI.  P.  :  pr.  vrhati ;  inj.  vrhat ;    op.  vrh6va ;  ipv. 

vrha  and  vrhatat ;  vrhatam  ;  vrhata  ;  ipf.  avrhas.    pf. 

vavarha.     ao.  sa:  avrksat  (B.).     ps.  vrhyate  (B.) ;  ao. 

varhi  ;  pp.  vrdha  (B.).     gd.  -vrhya.     inf.  -vrhas. 
ven  long,   I.  P. :   pr.  v6nati ;     inj.   v6nas ;    ipv.  venatam 

(2.  du.) ;  PT.  v^nant.    ipf.  avenat. 
vyac  extend.  III.  P.  :  pr.  viviktas  (3.  du.) ;  inj.  vivyak  (3. 

s.).    IPF.  avivyak  ;  aviviktam  (3.  du.) ;  avivyacur.     pf. 

vivyaktha,  vivyaca.     ppf.  vivyacat ;  A.  vivyacanta. 
vyath  waver,  I.  :  pr.  vyathate.     ao.  red. :  vivyathas  (B.)  ; 

is  :  SB.  vyathisat ;  inj.  vyathisthas ;  vyathismahi.     pp. 

vyathita.     inf.   vyathisyai  (B.).      cs.  vyathayati;    ao. 

vyathayis  (AV.). 
vyadh  jjierce,  IV.  P.  :  pr.  vidhyati.     pr.  vivyadha  (B.)  ; 

PT.  vividhvams.    ao.  s  :  vyatsis  (B.).    pp.  viddha.     inf. 

-vidhe.     cs.  vyadhayatL  (B.).     ds.  vivyatsati  (B.). 
vya  envelope,  IV.  :  pr.  vyayati,  -te ;  op.  vyayeyam  ;  ipv. 


422  APPENDIX    I 

vyayasva ;  pt.  vyayant.     ipf.  avyayam,  avyayat.     pf. 

vivyathiir;  A.  vivy6;  pt.  vivyana;    per.  pf.  -vyayam 

cakara  (B.).     ao.  a:  avyat;  avyata  (2.  pi.);  A.  avyata 

(3.    s.)   and   vyata.       ps.    viyate   (B.) ;    pp.    vita.       gd. 

-viya  (B.). 
vraj  proceed,  I.  P.  :  ipv.  vrajata  (2.  pi.);  pt.  vrajant.     pf. 

vavraja.     ao.  is  :  avrajit  (B.).     ft.  vrajisyati  (B.).     pp. 

vrajita  (B.).     gd.  -vrajya  (B.).    cs.  vrajayati  (B.). 
vrasc  cut  U2),  VI.  P. :  pp.  vrscati ;  sb.  vrseat ;  in.t.  vrseas  ; 

IV.  :    vrsca,   vrscatu ;    pt.   vrseant.     ipf.  avrscat   and 

vrseat.     PS.  vrscyate ;  pp.  vrkna.     gd.  vrstva ;  vrktvi. 
sams  praise.  I. :  pr.  samsati,  -te.     pf.  sasamsa  (B.) ;  sa- 

sams6  (B.).     ao.  root:  ipv.  sasta  (2.  pi.) ;  is:  asamsisam, 

asamsit ;    sb.  samsisas,  samsisat ;    inj.  samsisam.     ft. 

samsisyati  (B.).      ps.   sasyate ;    ao.   sarasi ;    pp.   sasta ; 

GDv.  samsya;  samstavya(B.).  gd.  sastva  (B.).  inf. -sase. 
sak  he  able,  V.  P.  :    pr.  saknomi,  saknoti ;    saknuvanti ; 

SB.  saknavama.     ipf.  asaknuvan.     pf.  sasaka ;  sekima, 

seka,  sekur.     ao.  root :    sb.  sakas,  sakat ;    op.  sakyam  ; 

ipv.    sagdhi,    saktam ;    a :   asakam,    asakat ;    asakan ; 

IN.T.   sakan ;  op.  sak^yam ;    sak6ma.     ft.  saksyati,  -te 

(B.).     inf.  saktave.     ds.  siksati,  -te. 

1.  sad  prevail :  pp.  sasadiir ;  A.  sasadmahe,  sasadr6 ;  pt. 
sasadana. 

2.  sa,d  fall:  pf.  sasada  (B.)  ;  sedur  (B.).     ft.  satsyati. 
sap  curse,  I.  :  pr.  sapati ;    sapate  (AV.)  ;   sb.  sapatas  (3. 

du.);  PT.  sapant.  ipf.  asapata  (2.  pi.),  pf.  sasapa; 
sepd  (1.  3.  s.),  sepis6.  ao.  s:  in.t,  sapta  (2.  pi.),  pp. 
sapta  (B.).     cs.    sapayati. 

1.  sam,  sim  labour,  IV.  P.  :  samyati  (B.) ;  simyati;  ipv. 
simyantu ;  pt.  simyant.  pp.  sasam6 ;  sb.  sasamate 
(3.  s.) ;  pt.  sasamana.  ao.  is  :  A.  asamisthas,  asamista. 
pp.  samita  (B.). 

2.  sam,  be  quiet,  IV.  (B.) :  pr.  samyati,  -te.  pf.  sasama 
(B.) ;  semiir  (B.).  ao.  a  :  asamat  (B.) ;  red. :  asisamat. 
pp.  santa.     cs.  samayati. 


LIST   OF   VEKBS  423 

sa  sharpen,  III.  :  pr.  sisami,  sisati ;  sisimasi  ;  A.  sisite ; 

ipv,  sisihi,  sisatu;  sisitam,  si  sit  am  ;  sisita  (2.  pi.);  pt. 

sisana.      iff.   sisas,   asisat ;    A,   sisita  (3.  s.).     pf.   pt. 

-sasana.     pp.  sita.     gd.  -saya. 
sas  order,  II.  :  sasmi,  sassi ;  A.  sast6 ;    sasmahe,  sasate ; 

SB.   sasan ;    ipv.   sadhi ;    sastana,    sasatu ;    pt.    sasat ; 

sasana.    iff.  asasam ;  A.  asasata  (3.  pi.),     pf.  sa^asa; 

^asasiir  ;  inj.  sasas  ;  ipv.  sasadhi.     ao.  root:  sb.  sas  as  ; 

a :  A.  sisamahi ;  inj.  sisat :  pt.  sisant.     pp.  iSista  ;    gd. 

-sisya  (B.). 
siks  (=  Ds.  of  sak)  he  helpful:  pr.  siksati,  -te  ;  sb.  siksas, 

siksat ;  siksan  ;    inj.  siksat ;    op.  sikseyam  ;    siksema  ; 

IPV.  siksa,  siksatu ;    siksatam ;    pt.  siksant ;    A.  siks- 

amana.    ipf.  asiksas ;    asiksatam. 
^is  leave,  VII.  P.  :  pr.  sinasti  (B.).     pf.  sisis^  (B.).     ao.  a: 

sisas.      FT.  seksyati,  -te  (B.).      ps.  sisyate ;    ao.  s^si ; 

pp.  sista.     GD.  -sisya  (B.). 
si  lie,    II.   A. :    pr.   s6se,    saye   (8.   s.)  ;    sayate    (3.   du.)  ; 

s^mahe,  sere  and  sdrate ;  op.  sayiya,  sayita  (3.  s.) ;  ipv- 

3.  s.  s^tam  and  say  am  (AV.) ;  pt.  sayana ;  ipf.  aseran. 

I.  :  PR.  sayate ;  sayadhve,  sayante ;  ipf.  asayat ;  asay- 

atam  ;  A.  asayata  (3.  s.).     pf.  sisy^  (B.)  ;  sisyir6  (B  ) ; 

PT.  sasayana.     ao.  s  :  sb.  si§san  ;  is :  A.  asayisthas.     ft. 

sayisyati,  -te  (B.) ;  sayitase  (B.).     inf.  sayadhyai. 
sue  gleam,  I.  :  pr.  socati,  -te.     pf.  susdca ;  op.  A.  susucita 

(3.  s.) ;  ipv.  susugdhi ;    pt.  susukvams ;  susucana.     ao. 

a  :  asucat ;  pt.  sucant ;  A.  sucamana  ;  red. :  siisucas  ; 

INJ.  susucas;    siisucan;    is:  inj.  socis;  ps.  asoei.     inf. 

sucadhyai.     cs.   socayati ;  pt.  sucayant.     int.   pb.   s6- 

sucan ;  A.  sosucanta;  pt.  sosueat ;  sosucana. 
sudh,  sundh  imrify,  I.  P.  :  pr.   sundhati ;  ipv.  siindhata 

(2.   pi.).     IV.  P.:  PR.   sudhyati  (B.).     pp.  suddha.     cs. 

sundhayati ;  sodhayati  (B.). 
subh,  sumbh  heautify,  I.  A. :  pr.  sobhate;  pt.  sobhamana; 

siimbhate ;  pt.  siimbhamana;    VI.  P.:  pr.  sumbhati; 

SB.  sumbhati ;    ipv.  sumbha ;    sumbhata,   sumbhantu ; 


424  APPENDIX   I 

PT.  sumbhamana.     ao.  root :  I'X.  subhana  ;  sumbhana  ; 

red.  :    asusubhan  ;    asusubhanta  (B.).      i>p.   sumbhita ; 

subhitd    (B.).      inf.    subh6 ;    sobhase ;    subham.      cs. 

subhayati,  -te ;  sobhayati. 
BUS   dry,    IV.    P.  :     pr.   susyati ;     ipv.    siisya,    siisyatu ; 

siisyantu.     gd.  -susya  (B.).     cs.  sosayati. 
su,  6va  sivell,  IV.  P.:  pr.  pt.  svayant.     pf.  susuviir;  A. 

susuv6 ;    SB.  susuvat ;    susavama ;    op.  susuyama ;    pt. 

susuvams  ;    A.   susuvana.     ao.   a  :    asvat  (B.) ;    s :  pt. 

savasana.     inf.  silsani ;  svayitum  (B.). 
srdh  he  defiant,  I. :  pr.  sardhati ;  sardhate  (B.) ;  inj.  sardhat; 

IPV.  sardha;  pt.  sardhant.     cs.  sardhayati. 
sr  crush,  IX.  :  pr.  srnami,  srnasi,  srnati ;  srnimasi ;    ipv. 

srnihi,   srnatu :    srnitam :    srnantu :    pt.  srnana.    iff. 

asrnat.     pf.  sasr6.     ao.  is :  asarit.     ft.  sarisyate  (B.). 

PS.  siryate  ;   ao.  sari;  pp.  sirna ;  -sirta.    gd.  -sirya  (B.). 

INF.  saritos. 
snaXh.  pierce,  II.  P.  :  su.  snathat ;  ipv.  snathihi.     ao.  red.: 

sisnatham,  asisnat  and  sisnathat ;    inj.  sisnathas;  is; 

IPV.    snathistam ;     snathistana.       pp.    snathita.       inf. 

-snathas.     cs.  snathayati,  -te. 
sya  coagidate,  IV.:    pr.  syayati  (B.).     ps.   siyate(B.);    pp. 

sita  ;  sina.     cs.  syayayati  (B.). 
srath   slaclen,   IX. :    pr.    srathnit6 ;    pt.    srathnana.     ipf. 

srathnas ;    asrathnan.      pf.    sasrath6.      ao.    red.  :    si- 

srathas,  sisrathat;    ipv.  sisrathantu.      pp.  srthita.     cs. 

srathayati,  -te. 
sram  he  weary,  IV.  P. :    pr.  sramyati.     pf.  sasramvir  ;    px. 

sasramana.      ao.   a:    asramat ;    int.    sramat;     is:    A. 

asrami  sthas ;  inj.  sramisma.     pp.  sranta.     gd. -sramya 

sra  (sri,  sr)  hod,  IX.  :  pr.  srinanti ;  sx"inis6 ;    ipv.  si'inihi  ; 

srinita  and  srinitana ;  pt.  srinant ;  A.  srinana.    ipf.  A. 

asrinita  (3.   s.).      pp.  srata;    srta.     cs.   srapayati;    ps. 

srapyate  (B.) ;  ao.  asisrapat  (B.). 
sri  resort,  I.  :  pr.  srayati ;  -te.     pf.  1.  sisraya,  o.  sisraya; 


LIST   OF   VERBS  425 

A.  sisriye;  oi\  sisrita(8.  s.) ;  pt.  sisriyana.    ppf.  asisret; 

asisrayur.      au.    root :    asres,   asret ;     asriyan ;     red. : 

asisriyat ;   s :   asrait   (AV.).      ft.    srayisyati,    -te    (B.). 

PS.  sriyate  (B.) ;  pp.  srita ;    ao.  asrayi.     inf.  srayitavai 

(B.).     cs.  srapayati  (VS.). 
sris   dasp,    I.:    sb.   sr6sama.      ao.  a:    in,t.   srisat.      inf. 

-srisas. 
sri    mix,    IX. :     pr.    srinati ;     sx'inite.      pp.    srita.       inf. 

sriyase. 
sru  hear,  V,:  pr.  srnomi,  srn6ti ;  srnvanti ;    A.  srnvis6, 

srnut6   and    srnv6 ;     srnvir6 ;     sb.    srnavas,    srnavat ; 

srnavama,   srnavan ;     op.    srnuyat ;     srnuyama ;    ipv. 

srnudhi,  srnuhi  and  srnii,  srnotu ;    srnutam ;    srnuta 

and  srnota,  srnotana,  srnvantu  ;  srnusva ;  pt.  srnvant ; 

•      •  ?••  7a*  7«»*  7  ••  7 

iPF.  asrnavam,  asrnos :    asrnvan.      pf.    1.  susrava,  3. 

susrava;    A.  susruv6  (3.  s.) ;    sb.  susravat ;    op.  susru- 

yas ;    susruyatam ;    pt.   susruvams.     ppf.    asusravur ; 

A.  asusravi  (1.  s.).     ao.  I'oot :    asravam,  asrot ;    asravan 

(AV.)  ;  SB.  sravat;  sravathas,  sravatas  ;  prc.  sruyasam, 

srtiyas  (o.  s.) ;   ipv.  srudhi,  srotu  ;    srutam  ;    sruta  and 

srota,    sruvantu  ;    a :    in.j.    sruvat ;    red. :    asusravat ; 

asusruvat  (B.) ;  s:  asrausit  (B.).     ft.  srosyati  (B.).     ps. 

sruyate ;    ao.  asravi,  sravi ;    pp.   sruta  ;    qdv.   srutya ; 

sravayya.     gd.  srutva;  -srutya.     cs.  sravayati,  srava- 

yati.     Ds.  susrusate. 
srus  hear,  I. :  inj.  srosan  ;   ipv.  srosantu  ;    pt.  srosamana. 
svafic  spread,  I.  A. :  ipv.  svancasva  ;  pt.  svaneamana.     pf. 

A.  SB.  sasvacai.     cs.  svancayas. 
svas  Now,  II.  :    pr.   svasiti ;   A.   suse ;    ipv.  svasihi ;    pt. 

svasant  and  susant ;    A.  susana ;    iff.  asvasit  (B.).     I. : 

PR.  svasati,  -te  (AV.).     pp.  svasita  (B.).     inf.  -svasas. 

cs.  svasayati.     int.  pt.  sasvasat. 
svit  he  bright:  ao.  root:   asvitan ;  pt.  svitana ;  red.  :  asi- 

svitat ;  s  :  asvait. 
sthiv  S2)ew,  I.  P. :  pr.  sthivati.    iff.  asthivan.    pf.  tisth6va 

(B.).     pp.  sthyuta  (B.). 


426  APPENDIX   I 

sagh   be  equal   to,  V.  P.  :    iff.   asaghnos.      ao.  root :   sb. 

saghat;  prc.  saghyasam  (B.). 
sac  accompany/,  I.  A. :  pr.  sacate.    III. :  pr.  sisaksi;  sisakti; 

sascati  (3.  pi.) ;   inj.  A.  sascata  (3.  pi.) ;   ipv.  sisaktu ; 

sisakta ;   pt.   sascat  and  sascat.      I. :    pk.  sascasi ;    A. 

sa^ce  (1.  s.)  ;    inj,   sascat;     ipv.  sascata  (2.    pi.);   ipf. 

asascatam  (2.  du.).     pf.   sascima,  sasciir  ;   A.  sascir6 ; 

secir6  (AV.) ;   pt.   sascivams.     ao.   root :    ipv.  saksva ; 

PT.  sacana ;    s :  A.   asaksata  (3.   pi.) ;    sb.  saksat ;    inj. 

saksata    (3.    pi.) ;     op.    saksimahi.       inf.    sacadhyai ; 

saksani. 

•        • 

saj,  sanj,  hang,  I.  P.  :  pr.  sajati.  ipf.  asajat,  pf.  sasanja 
(B.) ;  sejiir  (B.).  ao.  s  :  A.  asakta.  ps.  sajyate  (B.)  ;  ao. 
asanji  (B.) ;  pp.  sakta.  gd.  -sajya  (B.).  inf.  sanktos 
(B.).     Ds.  sisanksati  (B.). 

sad  dt,  I.  P.  :  pr.  sidati ;  sb.  sidati ;  inj.  sidan ;  op. 
sidema;  ipv.  sidatu ;  pt.  sidant.  ipf.  asidat.  pf. 
sasattha,  sasada ;  sedathur,  sedatur ;  sedima,  seda, 
sediir;  A.  sedir6;  op.  sasadyat ;  pt.  sediis-.  ao.  a: 
asadat ;  asadan  ;  inj.  sadas,  sadat ;  op.  sadema  ;  ipv 
sada,  sadatu ;  sadatam,  sadatam ;  sadata,  sadantu ; 
A.  sadantam ;  pt.  sadant ;  red.  :  asisadan ;  s  :  sb. 
satsat.  FT.  satsyati  (B.).  ps.  sadyate  (B.)  ;  ao.  asadi, 
sadi ;  pp.  satta ;  sanna  (AV.) ;  gdv.  sadya.  gd.  -sadya. 
INF.  -sade ;  -sadam ;  sattum  (B.).  cs.  sadayati,  -te  ; 
PS.  sadyate  (B.). 

san  gain,  VIII.  P. :  pr.  sanoti ;  sb.  sanavani,  sanavat ; 
sanavatha ;  op.  sanuyam ;  sanuyama ;  ipv.  sanuhi, 
sanotu ;  sanvantu.  ipf.  asanos,  asanot ;  asanvan.  pf. 
sasana ;  pt.  sasavams.  ao.  a :  asanam,  asanat ;  asan- 
ama,  asanan  ;  inj.  sanam,  sanat ;  op.  san6yara,  san6t ; 
IPV.  Sana ;  pt.  sanant ;  is :  asanisam  ;  sb.  sanisat ;  A. 
sanisamahe,  sanisanta ;  ipv.  sanisantu.  ft.  sanisyati. 
pp.  sata.  GDV.  sanitva.  inf.  sanaye ;  sataye.  ds. 
sisasati.     int.  A.  sanisnata  (3.  pi.). 


LIST   OF  VERBS  427 

sap  serve,   I. :  i>e.  sapati,  -te.     pf.  sepur.     ao.  red. :  inj. 

sisapanta. 
saparya  honour,  den. :  pr.   saparyati ;    sb.   saparyat ;    op. 

sapary6ma;    ipv.  saparya;    pt.  saparyant.     ipf.  asap- 

aryan.     ao.  asaparyait  (AV.).     gdv.  sapary^nya. 
sas  sleep,  II.  P.  :  pb.  sasti ;  sastas ;  ipv.  sastu ;  sastam ; 

sasantu ;    pt.    sasant ;      ipf.    asastana.      III.    P.  :     pr. 

sasasti  and  sasasti. 
sah  prevail,  I.  :  pr.  sahate ;  pt.  sahant  and  sahant ;  A.  sah- 

amana.     pf.  sasaha ;  A.  sasahis6,  sasah6  ;    sb.  sasahas, 

sasahat ;  op.  sasahyat ;  sasahyama ;  pro.  A.  sasahisthas ; 

PT.  sasahvams  and  sahvams ;  A.  sasahana  and  sehana. 

ao.  root :  op.  sahyas ;  sahyama ;  pkc.  sahyas  (3.  s.) ;  pt. 

sahana;   s:  asaksi  and  saksi ;  saksmahi  (B.) ;    sb.  sak- 

sati  and  saksat ;  saksama ;   A.  saksate ;    op.  saksiya ; 

IPV.  saksva ;    pt.  saksant ;   A.  sahasana ;    is  :  asahista  ; 

op.  sahisivahi ;    sahisimahi  and  sahisimahi.     ft.   sak- 

syate  (B.).     pp.   sadha.     (in.   -sahya.     ikf.  sahadhyai ; 

-saham  (B.).     ds.  siksati,  -te. 
sa  bind,  VI.  :  pr.   syati,   -te ;    ipv.   sya,  syatu ;    syatam, 

syatam ;    A.  syasva ;  syadhvam,     ipf.  asyat.     ao.  root : 

asat;  sb.  sat;  op.  simahi  ;    ipv.  sahi;  a:  op.  s6t  (VS.). 

pp.  sita.     GD.  -saya.     inf.  -sai ;  satum  (B.). 
sadh  succeed,  I.  :  pr.  sadhati,  -te.     ao.  red. :  sb.  sisadhati ; 

sisadhama ;  inj.  sisadhas.     cs.  sadhayati. 
si  hind,   IX.   P.  :  pr.    sinati ;    sinithas ;    ipv.   sinatu.     pf. 

sisaya  ;    inj.  siset.     ao.  root :  ipv.  sitam.     inf.  s^tave. 
sic  pour,  VI. :    pr.    sincati,    -te.     pf.    sisdca ;    sisicatur ; 

sisicur  ;  sisice.     ao.  a  :  asicat ;  asican  ;    sb.  sicamahe. 

FT.  seksyati  (B.).    ps.  sicyate;    ao.  aseci  (B.) ;  pp.  sikta. 

GD.  siktva  (B.)  ;  -sicya.     inf.  sektavai  (B.). 

1.  sidh  repel,  I.  P.:  pr.  sadhati.  pf.  sis^dha.  ao.  is: 
asedhis.  pp.  siddha  (B.).  gd.  -sidhya.  inf.  s^ddhum 
(B.).     INT.  PT.  s6sidhat. 

2.  sidh  succeed,  IV.  P. :  pr.  sidhyati.     pp.  siddha  (B.). 
siv   setv,    IV. :    pr.    ipv.    sivyatu ;     A.    sivyadhvam ;    pt. 

sivyant.     pp.  syuta.     gd.  -sivya. 


428  APPENDIX  I 

su  press,  V. :  pk.   sunoti ;    sunutas  ;    suuutha,  sunvanti ; 

A.  sunv6 ;  sunvir6 ;  «b.   sunavat ;    sunavama ;  A.  su- 

navai  ;  ipv.  sunii,   sunotu ;  sunuta  and  sunota,  suno- 

tana ;    A.   sunudhvam ;    pt.   sunvant ;    sunvana.      pf. 

susava  :    susuma  ;    pt.  susuvams ;    susvana.     ppf.  asu- 

savur  and  asusuvur  (B.).     ao.  root :  ipv.  s6tu ;  sutam  ; 

sota,   sotana ;    pt.  suvana,  svana.     ft.  savisyati  (B.) ; 

sota   (B.).       PS.    suyate ;     ao.    asavi;    pp.    suta;    gdv. 

s6tva.     GD.  -sutya  (B.).     inf.  sotave;  sotos. 
su  generate,   impel,  VI.  P.  :    pr.   suvati ;    sb.   suvati ;    ipv. 

Suva,  suvatat,  suvatu  ;  suvatam ;  suvantu ;  pt.  suvant ; 

ipp.  asuvat.     II.  A.  :  pr.  siive,   sute ;  siivate  (3.  du.) ; 

suvate  (3.  pi.)  ;  inj.  suta  (3.  s.) ;    pt.  suvana ;   iff.  asuta. 

pf.  sasuva  ;  susuv6.     ppf.  asiisot  (MS.) ;   asusavur  (B.). 

AO.  is :   asavit ;    asavisur  ;    sb.  savisat ;    inj.  savis.     ft. 

sosyati,   -te  (B.);   pt.   susyant.     ps.   suyate;    pp.  suta. 

GD.  sutva  (B.) ;  -sutya  (B.).     inf.  sutave,  sutavai ;  savi- 

tave.     INT.  sosaviti. 
sudxmt  in  order:  pf.  susudima;   sb.  susudas,  siisudat  and 

susudati ;   siisudatha  ;  ipv.  susudata  (2.  pi.),     ao.  red. : 

asusudanta.     cs.  sudayati,  -te ;  sb.  sudayati. 
sr  flow,  III.  :  PR.   sisarsi,  sisarti ;  A.  sisrate  (3.  pi.) ;  ipv. 

sisrtam;  A.  sisratam  (3.  pi.),     pt.  sisrat.     pf.  sasara; 

sasrva(B.) ;  sasi'ur  ;  A.  sasre  ;  sasrathe  ;  pt.  sasrvams  ; 

sasrana.     ao.  a  :  asaram,  asaras,  asarat ;  asaran ;   ipv. 

sara ;    s :  sb.  sarsat.     ft.  sarisyati.     ps.  ao.  asari  (B.) ; 

pp.  srta  (B.).     gd.  srtva  (B.)  ;  si'tya  (B.).     inf.  sartave, 

sartavai.      cs.   sarayati,  -te.      ds.   sisirsati  (B.).      int. 

sarsr6  (3.  s.)  ;  pt.  sarsrana. 
srj   emit,  VI.:   pr.    srjati,   -te.      pf.    sasarja;    A.   sasrj6; 

sasrjmahe,  sasrjrird  ;    op.  sasrjyat ;    pt.  sasrjana.     ppf. 

asasrgram  (3.   pi.),     ao.   loot :    asrgran,  asrgram ;    pt. 

srjana ;    s  :    sras  (2^  s.,  AV.),  asrak  (3.  s.),  asrat  (B.) ; 

asrastam  (2.  du.) ;  A.  asrksi,  asrsta ;  asrksmahi,  asrk- 

sata;  sb.  sraksat ;  inj.  srastam;  A.  srksatham  (2.  du.). 

FT.  sraksyati  (B.).     ps.   srjyate  ;    ao.  asarji ;    pp.  srsta. 


LIST   OF  VERBS  429 

GD.   srstva ;    -srjya  (B.).     os.   sarjayati,   -te  (B.).      ds. 

sisrksati,  -te  (B.). 
srp  creep,  I.  P. :  pr.  sarpati.     pf.   sasarpa  (B.).      ao,   n  : 

asrpat ;    inj.  srpat;   s:    A.  asrpta  (B.).     pt.  srapsyati 

(B.)  and  sarpsyati  (B.).     pp.  srpta(B.).     gd.  srptva  (B.) ; 

-srpya.      inf.    srpas   (B.).      ds.    sisrpsati.      int.    sari- 

srpyate  (B.). 
sev  attend  upon,  I.  A.  :  pr.  seve,  s6vate ;   ipv.  s6vasva. 
skand  leap,  I.  P.  :  pr.  skandati ;  sb.  skandat ;  ipv.  skanda ; 

PT.  skandant ;  ipp.  askandat.     pf.  caskanda.     ao.  root : 

skan  (3,   s.);    s:    askan  (B.)  and   askantsit  (B.).      ft. 

skantsyati  (B.).     pp.  skanna.      gd.  -skandya  (B.)  and 

-skadya  (B.).     inf.   -skade,   -skadas.'  cs.  skandayati. 

INT.  SB.  caniskadat ;  ipf.  kaniskan  (3.  s.). 
skabh  or  skambh  prop,  IX. :  pr.  skabhnati ;    pt.  skabh- 

nant ;  A.  skabhana  (B.). .  pf.  caskambha ;  skambhatur; 

skambhur;  pt.  caskabhana.    pp.  skabhita.    gd.  skabh- 

itvi.     INF.  -skabhe. 
sku  tear,  II.   P. :  pr.   skauti  (B.).      V.  P. :    pr.   skunoti. 

PS.  skuyate;   pp.  skuta.     int,  coskuyate. 
Stan  thunder,  II.  P. :  ipv.  stanihi;  in.t.  stan  (3.  s.).     I.  P.: 

IPV.   stana.     ao.  is :    astanit.     cs.   stanayati.     int.  ipv 

tamstanihi. 
stabh  or  stambh  prop,  IX. :  stabhnami ;    ipv.  stabhana ; 

iPF.  astabhnas,  astabhnat.     pf.  tastambha  ;  tastabhur ; 

PT.  tastabhvams  ;  tastabhana.    ppf.  tastambhat.    ao.  s  : 

astampsit  (B.) ;  is  :  astambhit,  stambhit.     pp.  stabhita ; 

stabdha  (B.).     gd.  stabdhva,  -stabhya  (B.). 
stu  praise,   II.  :    pr.   staumi  (AV.) ;    st6si,   stauti   (AV.) ; 

stumasi,    stuvanti ;    A.    stus6 ;    sb.   stavat ;    stavama, 

stavatha ;  A.  stavai ;  inj.  staut ;  op.  A.  stuvita ;  stuv- 

imahi ;    ipv.    stuhi,    stautu ;     pt.    stuvant ;    stuvana, 

stavana  and  stavana ;  ipf.  astaut.     I.  A. :  stavate  and 

stave  (3.  s.) ;  inj.  stavanta  ;  op.  staveta ;  pt.  stavamana. 

pf.  tustava  ;  tustuvur ;  A.  tustuv6 ;  sb.  tustavat ;  pt. 

tustuvams:  tustuvana.    ppf.  atustavam.     ao.  s:  astau- 

•    •  «7»«  ■• 


480  APPENDIX   I 

sit   (B.) ;    A.    astosi,  astosta ;    astodhvam,    astosata ; 

SB.  stosani,  stosat ;  stdsama ;  in.t.  stosam ;  is  :  astavit 

(B.).    FT.  stosyati,  -te  (B.) ;  stavisyati,  -te.    co.  astosyat. 

PS.   stuyate ;    ao.   astavi ;     pp.    stuta ;     gdv.  stus6yya. 

GD.  stutva;    -stiitya  (B.).      inf.   stavadhyai,   stotave ; 

stotum  (B.).     cs.  stavayati  (B.). 
stubh  praise,   I.  P. :   pr.   stobhati ;  ipv.  stobhata,  stobh- 

antu  ;  pt.  stobhant.    II.  A. :  pt.  stubhana.    pp.  stubdha 

(B.).     cs.  stobhayati. 
str  streiv,  IX. :    pe.    strnami ;    strnithana,    strnanti ;   A. 

strnit6  ;  inj.  strnimahi  ;  ipv.  strnihi ;  strnitam  (2.  du.) ; 

strnita;  A.  strnitam  (3.  s.) ;  pt.  strnant;   strnana  ;  iff. 

astrnat ;     astrnan.      V. :    pr.    strnosi ;     strnutd.       pf. 

tastara  (B.) ;  tastarur  (B.) ;  A.  tistir6  (3.  s.) ;  tastrir^  ; 

PT.    tistirana.      ao.   root :    astar ;     A.   astrta  (B.)  ;    sb. 

starate ;  staramahe ;    inj.   star  (2.   s.) ;   s :  astrsi  (B.)  ; 

OP.  strsiya ;    is :  astaris.     ft.   starisyati,   -te  (B.).     ps. 

striyate    (B.)  ;    ao.    astari ;      pp.    strta ;     stirna.      gd. 

stirtva  (B.) ;  -stirya  (B.).     inf.  -stire,  strnisani ;  stari- 

tave  (AV.) ;  startave  (B,),  startavai(B.) ;  staritavai{B.), 

-staritavai  (B.).     ds.  tistirsate  (B.)  ;  tustursate  (B.). 
stha  stand,  I.  :   pr.  tisthati,  -te.     pp.  tasthau  ;  tasthathur, 

tasthatur ;     tasthima,   tasthur ;    A.    tasthd,    tasthis6, 

tasth6 ;  tasthir6  ;  pt.  tasthivams ;  tasthana.     ao.  root : 

astham,   asthas,   asthat ;  asthama,  sthata,  asthur ;  A. 

asthithas,  asthita;  asthiran;  se,  sthas,  sthati  and  sthat ; 

sthatas  ;  inj.  stham,  sthat ;  sthiir ;   op.  stheyama  ;  ipv. 

sthatam  (2.  du.);  sthata;  pt.  sthant;  a:  asthat  (AV.) ; 

s:  asthisi  (B.) ;  asthisata  (3.   pi.);  inj.   sthesam  (VS.). 

FT.  sthasyati.    ps.  sthiyate  (B.);  pp.  sthita.    gd.  -sthaya. 

inf.  sthatum  (B.)  ;    sthatos  (B.).     cs.  sthapayati,  -te ; 

AO.   atisthipam,  atisthipas,   atisthipat ;  inj.   tisthipat. 

Ds.  tisthasati  (B.). 
sna  hatlie,   II.  P.  :  pr.   snati ;  ipv.  snahi ;  pt.  snant.    pp. 

snata.     gdv.  snatva.    gd.  snatva ;  -snaya.    inf.  snatum 

(B.).     cs.  snapayati;  -te  (B.)  ;  snapayati  (AV.). 


LIST   OF  VERBS  431 

spas  see :  pf.  paspase ;  pt.  paspasana.     ao.  root :  aspasta 

(3.  s.).     pp.  spasta.     cs.  spasayate. 
spr  ivin,  V.  :  pr.  sprnvat^  ;   sb.  sprnavama  ;  ipv.  sprnuhi. 

PF.  paspara  (B.).     ao.  root :  aspar  (2.  s.) ;    sb.  sparat ; 

INJ.  spar  (2.  s.) ;  ipv.  sprdhi ;   s  :  asparsam.     pp.  sprta. 

GD.  sprtva.     INF.  sparase. 
sprdh  contend,   I.  A. :  pr.   spardhate ;  pt.  spardhamana. 

PF.  A.  pasprdhate  (3.  du.) ;  pasprdhr6  ;  pt.  pasprdhana. 

PPF.   apasprdhetham  (2.    du.).      ao.   root :    A.  asprdh- 

ran  ;    pt.  sprdhana.     gd.  -sprdhya.     inf.  spardhitum. 
sprs  touch,  VI.  :  pr.  sprsati,  -te.     pf.  sb.  pasparsat.     ao. 

red.:  SB.  pisprsati ;   in,i.  pisprsas;  s:  aspraksam  (B.) ; 

sa:  asprksat.      pp.   sprsta.      gd.   sprstva  (B.);    -sprsya 

(B.).     inf.  -spfse;  sprsas  (B.).     cs.  sparsayati  (B.),  -te. 
sprh  he  eager :  cs.  sprhayanti ;  op.  sprhayet.    ipf.  asprh- 

ayam.     gdv.  sprhayayya. 
sphur  jerk,   VI.  :    pr.    sphurati ;    A.    sphurate  (B.) ;    sb. 

sphuran ;  inj.   sphurat ;    ipv.   sphura ;    sphuratam   (2. 

du.) ;    pt.   sphurant.      ipf.   asphurat.     ao.    is :  spharis 

(^sphr). 
sphurj  rumble,  I.  P.  :  pr.  sphurjati.     cs.  sphurjayati. 
smi  smile,  I.  :  pr.  smayate ;    inj.  smayanta ;    pt.  smaya- 

mana.     pf.  sismiy^  ;  pt.  sismiyana. 
smr  remember,   I. :  pr.  smarati,  -te.     ps.   smaryate  (B.) ; 

pp.  smrta. 
syand  move  on,   I.  A. :  pr.  syandate.     pf.  sisyadur ;    A. 

sisyad6.     ao.  red. :   asisyadat ;  asisyadanta ;    s  :  asyan 

(3.   s.).     FT.  syantsyati  (B.).     ps.   ao.  syandi  (B.) ;   pp. 

syanna.     gd.  syanttva  (B.) ;  syattva  (B.),  -syadya  (B.). 

INF. -syade;  syanttum  (B.) ;  cs.  syandayati  (B.) ;   inf. 

syandayadhyai.     int.  pt.  sanisyadat. 
sras,  srams/aZZ,  I.  A.:  pr.  sramsate  (B.).     pf.  sasramsur 

(B.).      ao.  root:    asrat  (VS.);    a:    op.  srasema;    red.: 

asisrasan ;     is :     asramsisata     (B.).      pp.    srasta.      gd. 

-sramsya  (B.).     inf.  -srasas.     cs.  sramsayati. 
sridh  blunder,  I.   P. :    pr.   sr^dhati ;    ipv.  sr^dhata ;    pt. 


432  APPENDIX  I 

sr^dhant.     ipf.   asredhan.     ao.    a, :    in.t.    sridhat ;    rx. 

sridhana. 
sru  floiiJ,   I. :    PR.  sravati.      pf,  susrava ;  susruvui* ;    inj. 

susrot.     PPF.  asusrot.     ao.  is :  asravis  (B.).     pp.  sruta. 

INF.  sravitave ;  sravitavai.     cs.  sravayati ;  -te  (B.). 
svaj  embrace,  I.:  pr.  svajate;  sb.  svajate,  svajatai  (AV.) ; 

INJ.   svaj  at ;  ipv.  svajasva;  svajadhvam.     pf.   sasvaj6; 

sasvajate  (3.  du.);  pt.   sasvajana.    ppf.   asasvajat.     pp. 

svakta  (B.).     inf.  -svaje. 
svad,   svad  siveeten,  I.  :  pr.  svadati,  -te ;   A.  svadate  ;   sb. 

svadati ;  IPV.  svada  ;  svadantu  ;  A.svadasva.    ao.  red.: 

INJ.  sisvadat.     pp.   svatta.     inf.  -siide.     cs.  svadayati, 

-te ;  pp.  svadita. 
SY-dn  sound:  ao.  is :  asvanit ;  inj.  svanit.     cs.  svanayati; 

pp.  svanita.     int.  sb.  sanisvanat. 
svap  sleep,  II.  P. :  pr.  ipv.  svaptu  ;  pt.  svapant.    I.  P.  :   pr. 

svapati.     pf.  susupiir  ;  inj.  susupthas  (B.) ;  pt.  susup- 

vams;   siisupana.     ao.  red. :  sisvapas  and  sisvap  (2.  s.). 

FT.  svapsyati  (B.) ;  svapisyami.    pp.  supta.    gd.  suptva. 

INF.  svaptum  (B.).     cs!  svapayati. 
svar  sound,  I.  P. :  pr.  svarati.     pf.  inj.  sasvar  (8.  s.).     ao. 

s :  asvar  (3.  s.) ;  asvarstam  (3.  du.)  ;    is  :  asvaris  (B.). 

inf.  svaritos  (B.).     cs.  svarayati. 
svid  siveat,   I.   A. :    pr.  svadate.      pf.    pt.  sisvidana.     pp. 

svinna.     cs.  svedayati  (B.). 
han  strike,  II. :  pr.  hanmi,  hamsi,  hanti ;  hathas,  hatas  ; 

hanmas,  hatha,  ghnanti ;  sb.  hanas,  hanati  and  hanat ; 

hanava ;    hanama ;    hanatha  (AV.),   hanan ;    inj.  han 

(3.  s.) ;  op.  hanyat,  hanyama;   ipv.  jahi,  hantu  ;  hatam, 

hatam;   hata  and  hantana,  ghnantu;  pt.  ghnant.     I.: 

PR.  jighnate  ;  -ti  (B.).    pf.  jaghantha,  jaghana ;  jaghna- 

thur  ;  jaghnima,  jaghnur ;  A.  jaghn6  (B.);  sb.  jaghan- 

at ;  PT.  jaghanvams  ;  jaghnivams  (B.).     ao.  is  :  ahanit 

(B.).     FT.  hanisyati ;   -te  (B.).     ps.  hanyate  ;    pp.  hata; 

GDV.   hantva.      gd.    hatva,    hatvi ;    hatvaya ;     -hatya. 

INF.   hantave,  hantavai ;  hantum.      cs.  ghatayati  (B.). 


LIST   OF  VERBS  433 

Ds.  jighamsati;  ao.  ajighamsis  (B.).  int.  janghanti ; 
SB.  janghanani,  janghanas,  janghanat ;  janghanava ; 
A.  janghananta  ;  ipv.  janghanihi  ;  pt.  janghanat ; 
ghanighnat. 
har  he  gratified,  IV. :  pr.  haryati ;  sb.  haryasi  and  haryas ; 
IPV.  harya ;  pt.  haryant.    ipp.  aharyat ;  A.  aharyathas. 

1.  ha  leave,  III.  P.:  pr.  jahami,  jahasi,  jahati;  jahati; 
SB.  jahani ;  jahama  ;  op.  jahyat ;  jahyiir ;  ipv.  jahitat, 
jahatu ;  jahitam ;  jahita ;  pt.  jahat.  ipf.  ajahat ; 
ajahatana,  ajahur.  pf.  jaha;  jahatur;  jahiir.  ao. 
root:  ahat  (B.) ;  s:  ahas  (3.  s.) ;  A.  ahasi,  ahasthas ; 
iN.r.  hasis  ;  sis :  in.t.  hasistam,  hasistam ;  hasista, 
hasisur.  ft,  hasyati ;  hasyate  (B.).  ps.  hiyate ;  ao. 
ahayi;  pp.  hind;  hana  (B.);  jahita.  gd.  hitva,  hitvi, 
hitvaya;   -haya  (B.).     inf.  hatum  (B.).     os.  ao.  jihipas. 

2.  ha  go  forth,  III.  A. :  pr.  jihite  ;  jihate  ;  jihate ;  inj. 
jihita;  ipv.  jihisva,  jihitam  (3.  s.) ;  jihatham  (2.  du.)  ; 
jihatam  (3.  pi.) ;  pt.  jihana.  ipf.  A.  ajihita ;  ajihata. 
pf.  jahir6.  ao.  red.:  jijananta;  s:  A.  ahasata  (3.  pi.); 
IN.T.  hasthas.  ft.  hasyate  (B.).  pp.  hand  (B.).  gd. 
-haya.     inf.  hatum.     cs.  hapdyati.     ds.  jihisate. 

hi  impel,  V. :  pr.  hinomi,  hinosi,  hinoti ;  hinmds  and 
hinmdsi,  hinvdnti;  A.  hinv6  (1.  3,);  hinvdte  and 
hinvir6 ;  sb.  hindva ;  inj.  hinvdn ;  ipv.  hinuhi,  hinutat, 
hinii  ;  hinotam ;  hinntd,  hinota  and  hinotana,  hinv- 
dntu ;  PT.  hinvdnt ;  hinvand ;  ipf.  dhinvan.  pf. 
jighaya  (B.) ;  jighyur  (B.).  ao.  root:  dhema,  dhetana, 
dhyan ;  ipv.  heta ;  pt.  hiyand ;  a :  dhyam ;  s :  dhait 
(3.  s.,  AV.) ;  dhaisit  (B.) ;  A.  dhesata  (3.  pi.),  pp.  hitd. 
GDv.  h^tva.     INF.  -hy6. 

Yiims  injiire.  Nil.  :  hindsti;  himsanti ;  A.  himste  (AV.); 
ipv.  hindstu ;  op.  himsyat  (B.)  ;  pt.  himsana ;  ipf. 
dhinat  (3.  s.,  B.).  I. :  pr.  himsati,  -te  (B.).  pf.  jihims- 
ima.  PPF.  jihimsis.  ao.  is :  inj.  himsisam,  himsis, 
himsit;  himsistam  (2.  du.) :  himsista,  himsisur.  ft. 
himsisydti,  -te  (B.).     ps.  himsydte  ;  pp.  himsita  ;    gdv. 

1«19  p  f 


484  APPENDIX   I 

himsitavya.     gd.  himsitva.     inf.  himsitum  (B.),  hims- 

itos  (B.).     Ds.  jihimsisati  (B.). 
hid  he  hostile,  I. :  pt.  h^lant ;    A.   h61amana ;  hidamana 

(B.).     PF.  jihila  (1.  s.),  jihlda  (AV.) ;  A.  jihil6  ;  jihilir6; 

PT.   jihilana.      AO,    red.:    ajihidat ;    is:    A.  hidisatam 

(TA.).     pp.  hidita.     cs.  pt.  helayant. 
hu  sacrifice.  III. :  pr.  juhomi,  juhoti ;  juhumas,  juhvati ; 

A.  juhv6,  juhut6 ;  juhvate  ;  sB.jiihavama;  op.juhuyat; 

juhuyama;  juhudhi  (B.),  juhotu;  juhuta  and  juhota, 

juhotana ;   A.  juhudhvam ;    pt.  juhvat ;  juhvana ;    ipf. 

ajtihavur ;  A.  ajuhvata.     pf.  juhv6 ;   juhur6 ;  juhvir6 

(B.) ;  per.  juhavam  eakara  (B.).     ao.  s:    ahausit  (B.). 

FT.  hosyati.      ps.  huyate ;    ao.   ahavi ;    pp.  huta.     gd. 

hutva  (B.).     INF.  h6tavai;  hotum  (B.),  hotos  (B.). 
hu  call,  I.  A. :  pr.  havate ;  in.t.  havanta ;  pt.  havamana. 

VI. :    PR.  huv6  (1.    3.) ;    huvamahe ;    inj.    huvat ;    op. 

huv^ma  ;  A.  huv6ya ;   pt.  huvant ;    ipf.  ahuve ;  ahuv- 

anta.      III.  :    pk.    juhumasi   and    juhumas.      II. :    pr. 

hut6  ;    humahe.       pf.    juhava ;    A.   juhv6 ;     juhur6 ; 

juhuvir6    (B.).       ao.   root:     A.    ahvi ;    ahumahi;    inj. 

h6ma ;  a  :  ahvam,  ahvat ;  ahvama ;  A.  ahve ;  ahvanta ; 

s :  A.  ahusata  (3.  pi.),      ps.  huyate ;    pp.  huta ;     gdv. 

havya.      gd.  -huya  (B.).      inf.  havitave;    huvadhyai. 

Ds.    jdhusati    (B.).      int.    johavimi,  johaviti;    sb.    A. 

johuvanta;  ipv.  johavitu;  ipf.  ajohavit;  ajohavur. 

1.  hr  talce,  I. :  pr.  harati,  -te  ;  sb.  harani,  harat;  harama, 
haran ;  op.  haret ;  harema ;  ipv.  hara ;  harata,  harantu ; 
PT.  harant.  ipf.  aharat.  pf.  jahara,  jahartha  (B.) ; 
jahrur ;  A.  jahr6  (B.).  ao.  root:  ahrthas  (B.) ;  s: 
dharsam,  ahar  (3.  s.) ;  A.  ahrsata(3.  pi.),  ft.  harisyati, 
-te  (B.) ;  harta  (B.) ;  co.  aharisyat  (B.).  ps.  hriyate ; 
pp.  hrta.  GD.  hrtva(B.) ;  -hrtya.  inf.  harase;  harta vai 
(B.);  hartos  (B.) ;  hartum  (B.).  cs.  harayati,  -te  (B.). 
DS.  jihirsati. 

2.  hr  he  angry,  IX.  A. :  pr.  hrnisd,  hrnit6 ;  in.t.  hrnithas  ; 
IPV.  hrnitam  (3.  s.) ;  pt.  hrnana. 


LIST   OF  VERBS  485 

hrs  he  excited,  I.  :  pr.  harsate ;  ipv.  harsasva ;  pt.  harsant ; 

harsamana.     pf.  pt.  jahrsana.     pp.  hrsita.     cs.  harsa- 

yati,  -te.     int.  sb.  jarhrsanta ;  pt.  jarhrsana. 
hnu  hide,  II. :  pr.  hnutas ;  A.  hnuv6.     pp.  hnuta.     gdv. 

hnavayya.  \ 

hri  he  ashamed,  III.  P. :  pk.  jihreti.    ao.  root :  pt.  -hrayana. 

pp.  hrita  (B.). 
hva  call,  IV.  :  pr.  hvayati ;  hvaye ;  sb.  hvayamahai  ;    op. 

hvayetam  (3.  du.) ;    ipv.  hvaya,  hvayatu ;    hvayantu  ; 

A.   hvayasva;    hvayetham  (2.   du.) ;    hvayantam;    pt. 

hvayamana.     ipf.  ahvayat ;    ahvayanta.     ao.   ahvasxt 

(B.).     ft.  hvayisyati,    -te  (B.).      inf.    hvayitavai  (B.) ; 

hvayitum  (B.). 
hvr  he  crooTced,  I.  A.  :  pr.  hvarate.     IX.  P. :  pr.  hrunati. 

— .  • 

III.:  SB,  juhuras;  A.  juhuranta;  inj.  juhurthas;  pt. 
juhurana.  ao.  red. :  jihvaras ;  inj.  jihvaras ;  jihvara- 
tam  (2.  du.) ;  s:  inj.  hvar  (2.  s.),  hvarsit;  is:  hvarisur. 
pp.  hvrta,  hrutd.     cs.  hvarayati. 


Ff  2 


APPENDIX   II 

VEDIC  METRE. 

1 .  The  main  principle  governing  Vedic  metre  ^  (the  source 
of  all  later  Indian  versification)  ^  is  measurement  by  number 
of  syllables.''  The  metrical  unit  here  is  not  the  foot  in  the 
sense  of  Greek  prosody,  but  i\\Q  foot  (pada)  or  quarter^  in 
the  sense  of  the  verse  or  line  which  is  a  constituent  of  the 
stanza.  Such  verses  consist  of  eight,  eleven,  twelve,  or 
(much  less  commonly)  five  syllables.  The  verse  is  further 
more  or  less  regulated  by  a  quantitative  rhythm  (unaffected 
by  the  musical  accent)  in  which  short  and  long  syllables 
alternate.  Nearly  all  metres  have  a  general  iambic  rhythm 
inasmuch  as  they  show  a  preference  for  the  even  syllables 
(second,  fourth,  and  so  on)  in  a  verse  being  long  rather  than 
short.  In  every  metre  the  rhythm  of  the  latter  part  of  the 
verse  (the  last  four  or  five  syllables),  called  the  cadence,  is 
more  rigidly  regulated  than  that  of  the  earlier  part.  Verses 
of  eleven  and  twelve  syllables  are  characterized  not  only  by 
their  cadence,  but  by  a  caesura  after  the  fourth  or  the  fifth 
syllable,  while  verses  of  five  and  eight  syllables  have  no 
such  metrical  pause. 


1  Called  ehandas  in  the  KV".  itself. 

2  Except  the  two  metres  Arya  and  Vaitaliya  which  are  measured 
by  morae. 

2  This  seems  to  have  been  the  only  metrical  principle  in  the  Indo- 
Iranian  period,  because  in  the  Avesta  the  character  of  a  verse  depends 
solely  on  the  number  of  syllables  it  contains,  there  being  no  quanti- 
tative restriction  in  any  part  of  it. 

*  A  figurative  sense  (derived  from  foot  =  quarter  of  a  quadruped) 
applicable  because  the  typical  stanza  lias  four  lines. 


VEDIC   METKE  437 

Verses  combine  to  form  a  stanza  or  re,  the  unit  of  the 
hymn,  which  generally  consists  of  not  less  than  thi'ee  or 
more  than  fifteen  such  units.  The  stanzas  of  common 
occurrence  in  the  EV.  range,  by  increments  of  four  syllables, 
from  twenty  syllables  (4  X  5)  to  forty-eight  (4  x  12)  syllables 
in  length.^  A  stanza  may  consist  of  a  combination  of 
metrically  identical  or  of  metrically  different  verses  ;  and 
either  two  or  three  stanzas  may  further  be  combined  to  form 
a  strophe. 

a.  The  following  general  rules  of  prosody  are  to  be  noted.  1.  The 
end  of  a  verse  regularly  coincides  with  the  end  of  a  word  ^  because 
each  verse  in  a  stanza  is  independent  of  the  rest  in  structure.  2.  Tho 
quantity  of  the  first  and  last  syllables  of  a  verse  is  indifferent. 
3.  A  vowel  becomes  long  by  position  if  followed  by  two  consonants. 
One  or  both  of  these  consonants  may  belong  to  the  following  word. 
The  palatal  as^^irate  ch  and  the  cerebral  aspirate  Ih  (dh)  count  as 
double  consonants.  4.  One  vowel  is  shortened  before  another  ;  ^ 
e  and  o  are  also  pronounced  e  and  6  before  a.  5.  The  semivowels 
y  and  v,  both  within  a  word  and  in  Sandhi,  have  often  to  be  pro- 
nounced as  i  and  u ;  e.  g.  siama  for  syama ;  suar  for  svar ;  vi  usah 
for  vy  usah ;  vidathesu  anjan  for  vidathesv  aiijan.  6.  Contracted 
vowels  (especially  i  and  u)  must  often  bo  restored  ;  e.  g.  ca  agndye 
for  cagnaye ;  vi  indrah  for  vmdrah  ;  dvatu  utaye  for  dvatiitaye  ;  a 
indra  for  6ndra.  7.  Initial  a  when  dropped  after  e  and  o  must 
nearly  always  be  restoi-ed.  8.  The  long  vowel  of  the  gen.  pi.  ending 
am,  and  of  such  words  as  dasa,  sura,  and  e  (us  jya-istha  for  jyestha) 
or  ai  (as  4-ichas  for  aichas)  must  often  be  jJi'onounced  as  equivalent 
to  two  short  syllables.  9.  The  spelling  of  a  few  words  regularly 
misrepresents  their  metrical  value  ;  thus  pavaka  must  always  be  pro- 
nounced as  pavaka,  mrlaya  as  mflaya,  and  suvand.  nearly  always  as 
svand. 


1  There  are  also  several  longer  stanzas  formed  by  adding  more 
verses  and  consisting  of  52,  56,  60,  04,  68,  and  72  syllables  ;  but  all 
these  ai-e  rare :  only  two  stanzas  of  68  and  one  of  72  are  found  in 
the  RV. 

^  No  infringement  of  this  rule  occurs  in  any  metre  of  the  RV.  but 
the  comparatively  rare  Dvipada  Viraj  (4  x  5),  in  which  three  exceptions 
are  met  with. 

3  The  vowels  i,  u,  e  when  Pragrhya  (25,  26),  however,  remain  long 
before  vowels.  When  a  final  long  vowel  is  the  result  of  Sandhi,  it 
also  remains  long  ;  t^ma  adat  for  tasmai  adat. 


438  APPENDIX   II 

I.    Simple  Stanzas. 

2.  The  Vedic  hymns  consist  chiefly  of  simple  stanzas, 
that  is,  of  such  as  are  formed  of  verses  which  are  all 
metrically  identical.  Different  stanzas  are  formed  by  com- 
bining three,  four,  five,  or  six  identical  verses.  The 
following  is  an  account  of  the  various  types  of  verse  and  of 
the  different  simple  stanzas  formed  by  them. 

A.  Verse  of  eight  syllables.  This  is  a  dimeter  verse 
consisting  of  two  equal  members  of  four  syllables  each,  the 
opening  and  the  cadence.  In  the  opening  the  first  and 
third  syllable  are  indifferent,  while  the  second  and  fourth 
are  preferably  long.  When  the  second  is  short,  the  third 
is  almost  invariably  long.  In  the  cadence  the  rhythm  is 
typically  iambic,  the  first  and  third  syllables  being  almost 
always  short,  while  the  second  is  usually  long  (though  it  is 
not  infrequently  short  also).  Thus  the  prevailing  scheme  of 
the  whole  verse  is  ^  —  ^—    ^-^^^^ 

a.  Even  after  every  adrdissible  vowel  restoration  a  good  many  verses 
of  this  type  exhibit  the  anomaly  (which  cannot  be  removed  without 
doing  violence  to  the  text)  of  having  one  syllable  too  few ;  e.  g.  tarn 
tua  vaydm  pito.  There  are  also  here  a  veiy  few  instances  of  one  or 
even  two  syllables  too  many ;  e.  g.  agnim  ils  |  bhujara  yavi  |  stham 
and  vayam  tad  as  \  ya  sambhrtam  !  vasu. 

3.  a.  The  Gayatri '  .stanza  consists  of  three '"  octosyllabic 
verses  ;  ^  e.  g. 


^  Next  to  the  Tristubh  this  is  the  commonest  metre  in  the  RV., 
ueai-ly  one-fourth  of  that  Sanihita  being  composed  in  it ;  yet  it  has 
entirely  disappeared  in  Classical  Sanskrit.  The  Avesta  has  a  parallel 
stanza  of  3  x  8  syllables. 

*  The  first  two  Padas  of  the  Gayatri  are  treated  as  a  hemistich  in 
the  Sanihita  text,  probably  in  imitation  of  the  hemistich  of  the 
Anustubh  and  the  Tristubh  ;  but  there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  in 
the  original  text  the  second  verse  was  more  sharply  divided  from  the 
third  than  from  the  first. 

5  By  far  the  commonest  variation  from  the  normal  type  is  that  in 
which  the  second  syllable  of  the  cadence  is  short  {\j  ^  ^  ^).  This 
occurs  about  as  often  in  the  first  verse  of  Gayatris  as  in  the  second 
and  third  combined. 


SIMPLE   STANZAS  i'69 

agnim  ile    purohitam    — w \  ^  —  ^  ^  \ 

yajnasya  de  |  vam  rtvijam  | v^  —  |w  —  ^^| 

hdtaram  ra  [  tnadhatamam  jj |w  —  ^^|| 

a.  A  comparatively  rare  but  sufficiently  definite  variety 
of  Gayatrl  ^  differs  from  the  normal  type  by  having  a  decided 
trochaic  rhythm  in  the  cadence, ^  while  the  iambic  rhythm 
of  the  opening  is  more  pronounced  than  usual ;  e.  g. 

tuam  no  ag  [  ne  mahobhih  |  ^  —  v^  —    - 

pahi  visva  |  sya  arateh  |  -  ^ I  ~  "-^ 

uta  dviso    martiasya  jl  w  —  w 


w  —  <j 


k_/    v^ 


h.  The  Anustubh'  stanza  consists  of  four  octosyllabic 
verses,  divided  into  two  hemistichs ;  e.  g. 

a  yas  te  sar  |  pirasute  ■ \  ^  —  ^  —  \ 

agne  sam  as  |  ti  dhayase w  —  j^  —  ^  —  jj 

aisu  dyumnam  \  uta  sravah  ' y^  \  <u  —  kj  ^  \ 

a  cittam  mar  I  tiesu  dhah v^  —  »^  —  11 

•  I  •  •      1 1  I  i  i 

a.  la  the  latest  hymns  of  the  RV.  there  begins  a  tendency  to 
differentiate  the  first  from  the  second  verse  of  an  Anustubh  hemistich 
by  making  the  end  of  the  former  trochaic,  while  the  cadence  of  the 
latter  becomes  more  strictly  iambic.  Although  in  these  hymns 
the  iambic  cadence  of  the  first  verse  is  still  the  most  frequent 
(25  per  cent.)  of  all  varieties,  it  is  already  very  nearly  equalled  by  the 
next  commonest  (23  per  cent.),  which  is  identical  with  the  normal 
and  characteristic  cadence  of  the  first  verse  in  the  epic  Anustubh  * 
(sloka).      The   scheme   of  the   whole    hemistich    according    to    this 

innovation  ^  then  is;i=i  —  Sil— |i^ ^  \\  ^  —  )=i  —  \  \^  —  ^  ^  \\  v.g. 

kesi  visa  |  sya  patrena  ||  yad  rudrena  |  pibat  saha  || 


'  The  only  long  series  of  such  trochaic  Gayatrls  occurs  in  RV.  viii. 
2,  1-39, 

^  The  trochaic  Gayatrl  is  commonest  in  Mandalas  i  and  viii,  which 
taken  together  contain  about  two-thirds  of  the  total  number  of 
examples  in  the  RV. 

'  The  frequency  of  this  metre  is  about  one-third  that  of  Gayatrl  in 
the  RV.,  but  in  the  post-Vedic  period  it  has  become  the  predominant 
metre.     The  Avesta  has  a  parallel  stanza  of  4  x  8  syllables. 

*  Where  the  iambic  cadence  in  the  first  verse  has  entirely  dis- 
appeared. 

*  This  is  the  regular  type  of  the  Aiiustubh  in  the  AV. 


440  APPENDIX    II 

c.  The  Pankti  stanza  consists  of  five  octosyllabic  verses  ^ 
divided  into  two  hemistichs  of  two  and  of  three  verses 
respectively.  In  origin  it  seems  to  be  an  extension  of  the 
Anustubh  by  the  addition  of  a  fifth  verse.  This  is  indicated 
by  tlie  fact  that  in  hymns  consisting  entirely  of  Pahktis  the 
fifth  verse  of  every  stanza  is  (except  in  i.  81)  regularly  a 
refrain  (e.  g.  in  i.  80).  The  following  is  an  example  of 
a  Pankti  stanza : — 

ittha  hi  soma  in  made  ;  brahma  cakara  vardhanam  |[ 
savistha  vajrinn  ojasa  [  prthivya  nih  sasa  ahim  \  arcann 
anu  svarajiam  |i 

cl  In  about  fifty  stanzas  of  the  KV.  the  number  of 
octosyllabic  verses  is  increased  to  six  and  in  about  twenty 
others  to  seven,  generally  by  adding  a  refrain  of  two  verses 
to  an  Anustubh  (e.g.  viii.  47)  or  to  a  Pankti  (e.g.  x.  133, 
1-3).  The  former  is  called  Mahapankti  (48),  the  latter 
i^akvari  (56). 

4.  B.  Verses  of  eleven  syllables  differ  from  those  of 
eight  in  consisting  of  three  members  (the  opening,  the  break, 
and  the  cadence).  They  also  contrast  with  the  latter  in  two 
other  respects :  their  cadence  is  trochaic  -  (-  w  -  -)  and 
they  have  a  caesura,  M'hich  follows  either  the  fourth "'  or  the 
fifth  syllable.  Tlie  rhythm  of  the  syllables  preceding  the 
caesura  is  prevailingly  iambic,  being  ^  -  ^  -  '^  or  -  -  -  -  -." 
The  rhythm  of  the  break  between  the  caesura  and  the 
cadence  is  regularly  w  v^  -  or  w  ^^ "  i .     Thus  the  scheme  of 


1  The  Avesta  has  a  parallel  stanza  of  5  x  8  syllables. 

^  The  only  irregularity  here  is  that  the  first  syllable  of  the  cadence 
may  be  short  when  it  coincides  with  the  end  of  a  word. 

3  This  appears  to  have  been  the  origiiial  position  of  the  caesura 
because  the  parallel  verse  of  the  Avesta  has  it  there  and  never  after 
the  fifth  syllable. 

*  Identical  with  the  opening  of  the  octosyllabic  verse. 

6  The  fourth  syllable  here  is  sometimes  short :  the  fifth  is  then 
always  long. 

6  The  first  of  these  two  syllables  is  sometimes,  but  rarely,  long  in 
the  old  hymns  of  the  RV.,  still  more  rarely  in  the  later  hymns,  and 
hardly  ever  in  B. 


SIMPLE   STANZAS  441 

the  whole  normal  verse  of  eleven  syllables  is  : 

(«)  ^-^-,  ^  ^  -\^y^-^\     or 
{h)  ^-^-^,  v^v^l-^-^l 

«.  Apart  from  corruptions  or  only  seeming  irregularities  (removable 
by  restoration  of  vowels)  several  verses  of  tliis  tyjie  have  one  syllabic 
too  many  or  too  few;^  e.g.  ta  no  vidvamsa,  manma  vo  ]  cetam 
adyd-  (12);  tam  im  giro,  jdna  |  yo  na  pdtnih  ^  (lOj.  Occasionally 
two  syllables  are  wanting  after  the  caesura  or  the  verse  is  too  long  by 
a  trochee  added  at  tlie  end  ;  e.  g.  t4  u  sd  no,  [. .]  ma  |  ho  yajatrah  (9)  ; 
ay^m  s^  hota,  [v^  o]  yo  dvijdnma  (9) ;  rathebhir  yata,  rsti  |  mddbhir 
fisva  I  parnaih  (13). 

5.  The  Tristiibh  stanza,  the  commonest  in  the  RV,,^ 
consists  of  four  verses  of  eleven  syllables  '  divided  into  two 
hemistichs.     The  following  are  hemistichs  of  each  type  : 

(a)  anagastv6,  aditi  j  tv6  turasah  j  imam  yajnam,  da- 

dhatu  I  srosamanah  || 
(6)   asmakam    santu,    bhiiva  [  nasya    gopah  |  pibantu 

somam,  ava  |  se  nd  adya  1| 

a.  A  few  Tristubh  stanzas  of  only  two  verses  (dvipada)  occur 
(e.g.  vii.  17).  Much  commoner  are  those  of  three  verses  (viraj),  the 
first  two  of  which  (as  in  the  Gayatri  stanza)  are  treated  in  the 
Sarnhita  text  as  a  hemistich ;  the  whole  of  some  hymns  is  composed 
in  this  three-line  metre  (e.  g.  iii.  25).  Fairly  frequent  are  also 
Tristubli  stanzas  of  five  verses^  divided  into  two  hemistichs  of  two 
and  three  A'erses  respectively.  Thdy  are  always  of  isolated  occurrence, 
appearing  generally  at  the  end  of  (Tristubh)  hymns,  but  never  form- 
ing an  entire  hymn. 


^  This  anomaly  also  appears  in  the  metre  of  later  Vedic  texts  and  of 
Pali  poetry. 

^  The  extra  syllable  in  such  cases  is  perhaps  due  to  the  verse  being 
inadvertently  continued  after  a  fifth  syllable  caesura  as  if  it  were 
a  fourth  syllable  caesura. 

^  The  deficiency  of  a  syllable  in  such  cases  may  have  been  partly 
due  to  the  similarity  of  the  decasyllabic  Dvipada  Viraj  (8)  with  which 
Tristubh  verses  not  infrequently  interchange. 

*  About  two-fifths  of  the  RV.  are  composed  in  this  metre. 

*  The  Avesta  has  a  parallel  stanza  of  4x  11  syllables  with  caesura 
after  the  fourth  syllable. 

^  These  are  accounted  Atijagati  (62)  or  Sakvari  stanzas  by  the 
ancient  metricians  when  the  fifth  verse  is  a  repetition  of  the  fourth. 
If  it  is  not  a  repetition  it  is  treated  in  the  Sarnhita  text  as  a  separate 
verse  (as  v.  41,  20;  vi.  (J3,  11)  and  is  called  an  ekapada  by  the 
metricians. 


442  APPENDIX   II 

6.  C.  The  verse  of  twelve  syllables  is  probably  an 
extension  ^  of  the  Tristubh  verse  by  one  syllable  which  gives 
the  trochaic  cadence  of  the  latter  an  iambic  character. ^ 
The  rhythm  of  the  last  five  syllables  is  therefore  -  ^  -  v^  ^. 
The  added  syllable  being  the  only  point  of  difference,  the 
scheme  of  the  whole  verse  is  : 

or 


{a)  -  _  -  _,  ^  ^  _ 

—    V^    —    1^    —     j 

(6)    ^  -  ^  -   ^,     w   ^ 

-  ^  -   w  ^ 

a.  Several  examples  occur  of  this  type  of  verse  (like  the  Tristubh) 
having  one,  and  occasionally  tM'o,  syllables  too  many  or  too  few  ;  e.g. 
ma  no  mdrtaya,  ripave  vajiuivasu  (13)  ;  rodasi  a,  vada  1  ta  ganasri- 
yah  (11)  ;  sd.  drlhe  cit,  abhi  tr  |  natti  vajam  ar  [  vata  (14) ;  piba 
somam,  [>w^  >^]  e  |  na  satakrato  (10). 

7.  The  Jagati  stanza,  the  third  in  order  of  frequency  in 
the  RV.,  consists  of  four  verses  of  twelve  syllables  divided 
into  two  hemistichs.  The  following  hemistich  gives  an 
example  of  each  of  the  two  tyj^es  of  verse : 

ananudo,  vrsabhd  |  dodhato  vadhah  I 
gambhira  rsvo,  asam  j  astakaviah  || 

a.  There  is  an  eleven  syllable  variety  of  the  Jagati  verse  which  is 
sufficiently  definite  in  type  to  form  entire  stanzas  in  two  hymns  of 
the   RV.    (x.  77,  78).     It   lias  a  caesura  after  both  the  fifth  and  the 

seventh    syllable,    its    scheme    being    ^  —  ^  —  \^ , ,    lu  —  ^-i  ^  \ 

The  following  hemistich  is  an  example : 

abhrapriiso  na,  vaca,  prusa  vd.su  | 

havismanto  na,  yajna,  vijanusah  || 

8.  D.  The  verse  of  five  syllables  resembles  the  last  five 
syllables  of  the  Tristubh  verse  in  rhythm,  its  commonest 
form  being  w  —  ^  —  — ,  and  the  one  next  to  it  in  frequency 


1  It  is  probably  not  Indo-Iranian,  because  though  a  verse  of 
12  syllables  occurs  in  the  Avesta,  it  is  there  dilierently  divided  (7  +  5). 

^  As  the  Gayatrl  verse  is  never  normally  found  in  combination 
with  the  Tristubh,  but  often  with  the  Jagati  verse,  it  seems  likely 
that  the  iambic  influence  of  the  Gayatrl  led  to  the  creation  of  the 
Jagati,  with  which  it  could  form  a  homogeneous  combination. 

^  That  is,  its  first  syllable  is  less  often  long  than  short 


THE   JAGATI   STANZA  443 

The  Dvipada  Viraj  stanza^  consists  of  four  such  verses 
divided  into  two  hemistichs  ;  ^  e.  g. 

pari  pra  dhanva  ]  indraya  soma  | 
svadur  mitraya  [  pusn6  bhagaya  \\ 

a.  Owing  to  the  identity  of  the  cadence  a  Dvipada 
hemistich  '■'  not  infrequently  interchanges  in  the  same  stanza 
with  a  Ti'istubh  verse  ;  *  e.  g. 

•  priya  vo  nama  |  huve  "'  turanam  ] 

a  yat  trpan,  maruto    vavasanah  H 

b.  Tlie  mixture  of  Dvipada  hemistichs  with  Tristubh 
verses  led  to  an  entire  hymn  (iv.  10)  being  composed  in  a 
peculiar  metre  consisting  of  three  pentasyllable  verses' 
followed  by  a  Tristubh  ;  e.  g. 

agne  tarn  adya  |  asvam  na  stomaih  |  kratum  na  bhadram  | 
hrdisprsam,  rdhia  j  ma  ^  ta  ohaih  || 

II.    Mixed  Stanzas. 

9.  The  only  different  verses  normally  used  in  combination 
to  form  a  stanza  are  the  Gayatrl  and  the  Jagatl.  The 
principal  metres  thus  formed  are  the  following  : 

a.  Stanzas  of  28  syllables  consisting  of  three  verses,  the 
lirst  two  of  which  are  treated  as  a  hemistich  : 


1  Tills  stanza  is  somewhat  rare,  occumng  in  the  RV.  not  nuicli  more 
tlian  a  hundi-ed  times. 

-  The  otherwise  universal  rule  that  the  end  of  a  verse  must  coincide 
with  the  end  of  a  word  is  three  times  ignored  in  this  metre  (at  the 
end  of  the  first  and  third  verses). 

3  With  this  metre  compare  the  defective  Tristubh  verse  of  ten 
syllables  (4  a). 

*  This  interchange  occurs  especially  in  RV.  vii.  34  and  56. 

^  Here  the  verb,  though  the  first  word  of  the  verse  (App.  Ill,  19  b), 
is  unaccented.  This  is  because  the  end  of  the  first  and  the  third 
verse  in  this  metre  has  a  tendency  to  bo  treated  like  a  caesura  rather 
than  a  division  of  the  stanza.     Cp.  note  2. 

•^  These  three  verses  are  treated  as  a  hemistich  in  the  Samhita  text. 

"^  The  verb  is  accented  because  in  the  Samhita  text  it  is  treated  as 
the  first  word  of  a  separate  verse. 


444  APPENDIX  II 

1.  Usnih:  8  8  12  ;  e.g. 

agne  vaja  |  sya  gomatah  j 

isanah  sa  ;  haso  yaho  || 

asm.6  dhehi,  jatave  '  do  mahi  sravah  i| 

2.  Purausnih :  12  8  8;  e.  g. 

apsii  antar,  amrtam  \  apsii  bhesajam  | 

apam  uta  [  prasastaye  ]| 

d6va  bhava  j  ta  vajinah  ||  i 

3.  Kakubh  :  8  12  8  ;  e.  g. 

adha  hi  in  j  dra  girvanah  | 

lipa  tva  kaman,  mahah    sasrjmahe  || 

ud6va  yan  j  ta  udabhih   j 

b.  Stcinzas  of  36  syllables  consisting  of  four  verses  divided 
into  two  hemisticlis  :  Brhati  8  8  12  8;  e.g. 

sacibhir  nah  j  sacivasu  | 

d6va  naktam  |  dasasyatam  '' 

ma  vam  ratir,  upa  da    sat  kada  cana  | 

asmad  I'atih    kada  cana 

c.  Stanzas  of  40  syllables  consisting  of  four  verses  divided 
into  U\o  hemisticlis  :  Satobrhati  12  8  12  8;  e.  g. 

janaso  agnim,  dadhi    re  sahovrdham  ] 
havismanto  1  vidhema  te  , 
sa  tvam  no  adya,  suma    na  ihavita  ] 
bhava  vaje  |  su  santia  |j 

10.  There  are  besides  two  much  longer  mixed  stanzas  of 
seven  verses/  each  of  which  is  split  up  into  three  divisions 
of  three,  two,  and  two  verses  respectively  in  the  Samhita 
text. 

a.  Stanzas  of  60  syllables  consisting  of  six  Gayatri 
verses  and  one  Jagati:  Atisakvari  8  8  8,  8  8,  12  8  ;  ^  e.  g. 


^  These  arc  the  composition  of  a  very  few  individual  i)octs. 
^  Only  about  ten  examples  of  this  metre  occur  in  the  KV. 


MIXED   STANZAS  445 

susuma  ya  ]  tain  adribhih  | 

gosrita  mat  |  sara  im6  | 

somaso  mat  !  sara  im6  || 

a  raj  ana  1  divisprsa  ] 

asmatra  gan  [  tarn  upa  nah  || 

ime  vam  mitra,  -varu  |  na  gavasirah  | 

somah  sukra  ]  gavasirah  1 

h.  Stanzas  of  68  syllables  consisting  of  four  GayatrT  and 
three  Jagati  verses  :  Atyasti'  12  12  8,  8  8,  12  8  ;  e.  g, 

sa  no  n6distham,  dadrs    ana  a  bhara  I 
agne  dev^bhih,  saca  J  nah  sueetxina  | 
maho  rayah  j  sucetuna  || 
mahi  savi    stha  nas  krdhi  I 

1     •  •  •  I 

samcakse  bhu  |  j6  asiai  || 

mahi  stotrbhyo,  magha  J  van  suviriam  | 

mathir  ugro  |  na  savasa  j[ 

a.  Besides  the  above  mixed  metres  various  other  but  isolated 
combinations  of  Gayatri  and  Jagati  verses  occur  in  the  KV.,  chiefly  in 
single  hymns.  There  are  stanzas  of  this  kind  containing  20  syllables 
(128) ; 2  32  syllables  (12 8,  12)  ;»  40  syllables  (12  12,  8 8) ;  *  44  syllables 
(12  12,  12  8)  5  ;    52  syllables  (12  12,  12  8  8).« 

/3.  1.  Tristubh  verses  are  quite  often  interspersed  in  Jagati  stanzas, 
but  never  in  such  a  way  as  to  form  a  fixed  type  of  stanza  or  to  make 
it  doubtful  whether  a  hymn  is  a  Jagati  one.'^  This  practice  probably 
arose  from  the  interchange  of  entire  Tristubh  and  Jagati  stanzas  in 
the  same  hymn  bringing  about  a  similar  mixture  within  a  single 
stanza.  2.  An  occasional  licence  is  the  combination  of  a  Tristubh 
with  a  Gayatri  verse  in  the  same  stanza.  This  combination  appears 
as  a  regular  mixed  stanza  (11  8,  8  8)  in  one  entire  hymn  (RV.  x.  22).* 
3.  The  combination  of  a  Tristubh  verse  with  a  Dvipada  Viraj  hemistich 
has  already  been  noted  (8  a). 


1  This  is  the  only  comparatively  common  long  metre  (of  more  than 
48  syllables)  in  the  RV.,  where  more  than  80  Atyasti  stanzas  occur. 

2  RV.  viii.  29.  ^  rv.  ix.  110.  "   *  RV.  x.  93. 
■'  RV.  viii.  35.                                     «  RV.  v.  87. 

'  fiut  the  intrusion  of  Jagati  verses  in  a  Tristubh  lij'mn  is 
exceptional  in  the  RV.,  though  very  common  in  the  AV.  and  later. 

*  Except  stanzas  7  and  15,  which  are  pure  Anustubh  and  Tristubh 
respectively. 


446  APPENDIX   II 


III.    Strophic  Stanzas. 

11.  Two  or  three  stanzas  are  often  found  strophically 
combined  in  the  KV..  forming  couplets  or  triplets. 

A.  Three  simple  stanzas  (called  trca)  in  the  same  metre 
are  often  thus  connected.  Gayatrl  triplets  are  the  com- 
monest ;  less  usual  are  Usnih,  Brhati,  or  Pahkti  triplets  ; 
while  Tristubh  triplets  are  rare.  A  hymn  consisting  of 
several  triplets  often  concludes  with  an  additional  stanza  in 
a  different  metre. 

a.  It  is  a  typical  practice  to  conclude  a  hymn  composed  in  one 
metre  with  a  stanza  in  another.  A  Tristubh  stanza  at  the  end  of 
a  Jagati  hymn  is  the  commonest ;  a  final  Anustubh  stanza  in  Gayatrl 
hymns  is  much  less  usual ;  but  all  the  commoner  metres  are  to  some 
extent  thus  employed  except  the  Gayatvi,  which  is  never  used  in 
this  way. 

B.  Two  mixed  stanzas  in  different  metres  are  often  com- 
bined, the  RV.  containing  about  250  such  strophes.  This 
doubly  mixed  strophic  metre,  called  Pragatha,  is  of  two 
main  types  : 

1.  The  Kakubha  Pragatha  is  much  the  less  common 
kind  of  strophe,  occurring  only  slightly  more  than  fifty 
times  in  the  RV.  It  is  formed  by  the  combination  of  a 
Kakubh  with  a  SatobrhatT  stanza :  8  12,  8-M2  8,  12  8  ;  e.  g. 

a  no  asva  |  vad  asvina  | 

vartir  yasistam,  madhu  |  patama  uara  || 

gdmad  dasra  |  hiranyavat  |j 

supravargam,  suviryam  [  susthii  variam  | 

anadhrstam  I  raksasvina  | 

asminn  a  vam,  ayane  |  vajinivasu  j 

visva  vama  |  ni  dhimahi  j{ 

2.  The  Barhata  Pragatha  is  a  common  strophe,  occurring 
nearly  two  hundred  times  in  the  RV.     It  is  formed  by  the 
combination  of  a  Brhati  with  a  Satobrhatl  stanza  :  8  8,  12  8 -f 
12  8,  12  8  ;  e.  g.     ' 


STROPHIC   STANZAS  447 

dyumni  vam  |  stdmo  asvina  | 

krivir  na  s6  |  ka  a  gatam  || 

madhvah  sutasya,  sa  di  |  vi  priy6  nara  | 

patam  gaurav  |  iv6rine  || 

pibatam  gharmam,  madhu  |  mantam  asvina  | 

a  barhih  si  |  datam  nara  || 

ta  mandasana,  manu  |  so  durona  a  | 

ni  patam  v6  [  dasa  vayah  |] 

a.  Of  these  two  types  there  are  many  variations  occurring  in 
individual  hymns,  chiefly  by  the  addition  of  one  (8),  two  (12  8), 
three  (12  8  8),  or  once  (vii.  96,  1-3)  even  four  verses  (12  12  8  8). 


APPENDIX   III 

THE    VEDIC    ACCENT. 

1.  The  accent  is  marked  in  all  the  texts  of  the  four  Vedas 
as  well  as  in  two  Brahmanas,  the  Taittiriya  (including  its 
Aranyaka)  and  the  Satapatha  (including  the  Brhadaranyaka 
Upanisad). 

The  Vedic,  like  the  ancient  Greek,  accent  was  a  musical 
one,  depending  mainly  on  pitch,  as  is  indicated  both  by  its 
not  affecting  the  rhythm  of  metre  and  by  the  name  of  the 
chief  tone,  udatta  raised.  That  such  was  its  nature  is, 
moreover,  shown  by  the  account  given  of  it  by  the  ancient 
native  phoneticians.  Three  degrees  of  pitch  are  to  be  dis- 
tinguished, the  high,  properly  represented  by  the  udatta, 
the  middle  by  the  svarita  {sounded),  and  the  low  by  the 
anudatta  [not  raised).  But  in  the  Rigveda  the  Udatta. 
the  rising  accent,  has  secondarily  acquired  a  middle  pitch, 
lower  than  the  initial  pitch  of  the  Svarita.  The  Svarita  is 
a  falling  accent  representing  the  descent  from  the  Udatta 
pitch  to  tonelessness.  In  the  Rigveda  it  rises  slightly 
above  Udatta  pitch  before  descending :  here  therefore  it  has 
something  of  the  nature  of  a  circumflex.  It  is  in  realitv 
always  an  enclitic  accent  following  an  Udatta,  though  it 
assumes  the  appearance  of  an  independent  accent  when  the 
preceding  Udatta  is  lost  by  the  euphonic  change  of  a  vowel 
into  the  corresponding  semivowel  (as  in  kva  =  kiia).  In 
the  latter  case  it  is  called  the  independent  Svarita.  The 
Anudatta  is  the  low  tone  of  the  syllables  preceding  an 
Udatta. 

2.  There  are  four  different  methods  of  marking  the  accent 
in  Vedic   texts.      The  system    of   the    Rigveda,    which    is 


METHODS    OF   MARKING   ACCENTS  449 

followed  by  the  Atharvaveda,  the  Vajasaneyi  Samhita,  the 
Taittirlya  Samhita  and  Brahmana,  is  peculiar  in  not  marking 
the  principal  accent  at  all.  This  seems  to  be  due  to  the  fact 
that  in  the  RV.  the  pitch  of  the  Udatta  is  intermediate 
between  the  other  two  tones.  Hence  the  preceding  Anudatta, 
as  having  a  low  pitch,  is  indicated  l)elow  the  syllable  bearing 
it  by  a  horizontal  stroke,  while  the  following  Svarita,  which 
at  first  rises  to  a  slightly  higher  pitch  and  then  falls,  is 
indicated  above  the  syllable  bearing  it  by  a  vertical  stroke  ; 
e.  g.  agnina  =  agnina ;  viryam  =  viryam  (for  viriam). 
Successive  Udattas  at  the  beginning  of  a  hemistich  are 
indicated  by  the  absence  of  all  marks  till  the  enclitic  Svarita 
which  follows  the  last  of  them  or  till  the  Anudatta  which 
(ousting  the  enclitic  Svarita)  follows  the  last  of  them  as 
a  preparation  for  another  Udatta  (or  for  an  independent 
Svarita) ;  e.  g.  tav  a  yatam  =  tav  a  yatam ;  tavet  tat 
satyam  ^  =  tav6t  tat  satyam.  On  the  other  hand,  all 
successive  unaccented  syllables  at  the  beginning  of  a 
hemistich  are  marked  with  the  Anudatta  ;  e.  g.  vaisvanaram 
=vaisvanaram.  But  all  the  unaccented  syllables  following 
a  Svarita  remain  unmarked  till  that  which  immediately 
precedes  an  Udatta  (or  independent  Svarita) ;  e,  g.  imam 
me  gange  yamune  sarasvati  sutiidri  =  imam  me  gaiige 
yamune  sarasvati    sutudri. 

a.  Since  a  hemistich  of  two  or  more  Padas  is  treated  as 
a  unit  that  consists  of  an  unbroken  chain  of  accented  and 
unaccented  syllables,  and  ignores  the  division  into  Padas, 
the  mai'king  of  the  preceding  Anudatta  and  the  following 
Svarita  is  not  limited  to  the  word  in  which  the  Udatta 
occurs,  but  extends  to  the  contiguous  words  not  only  of  the 
same,  but  of  the  succeeding  Pada ;  e.  g.  agnina  rayim 
asnavat  posam  eva  dive-dive  =  agnina  rayim  asnavat  | 


1  Here  the  enclitic  Svarita,  which  would  rest  on  the  syllable  sa  if 
the  following  syllable  were  vmaccented,  is  ousted  by  the  Anudatta, 
which  is  required  to  indicate  that  the  following  syllable  tyam  has  the 
Udatta. 

1819  G  g 


450  APPENDIX   III 

p6sam  eva  div6-dive ;  sa  nah  piteva  sunave  ,jgne  supa- 
yano  bhava  =  sa  nah  pit6va  sunav6  'gne  supayano 
bhava.^ 

h.  When  an  independent  Svarita  ^  immediately  precedes  an 
Udatta,  it  is  accompanied  by  the  sign  of  the  numeral  1  if 
the  vowel  is  short  and  by  3  if  it  is  long,  the  figure  being 
marked  with  both  the  Svarita  and  the  Anudatta ;  e.  g. 
apsviantah  =  apsii  antah ;  rayo  ^  vanih  =  rayo  'vanih 
(cp.  17,  3). 

3.  Both  the  MaitrayanT  and  the  Kathaka  Samhitas  agree 
in  marking  the  Udatta  with  a  vertical  stroke  above  (like  the 
Svarita  in  the  EV.),  thereby  seeming  to  indicate  that  here 
the  Udatta  rose  to  the  highest  pitch  ;  e.  g.  agnina.  But 
they  differ  in  their  method  of  marking  the  Svarita.  The 
MaitrayanI  indicates  the  independent  Svarita  by  a  curve 
below  ;  e.  g.  viry^ira  =  viryam  ;  but  the  dependent  Svarita 
by  a  horizontal  stroke  crossing  the  middle  of  the  syllable  or 
by  three  vertical  strokes  above  it ;  while  the  Kathaka 
marks  the  independent  Svarita  by  a  curve  below  only  if  an 
unaccented  syllable  follows,  but  by  a  hook  below  if  the 
following  syllable  is  accented  ;  e.  g.  viryam  =  viryam 
badhnati;  viryam  =  viryam  vyacaste ;  the  dependent 
Svarita  has  a  dot  below^  the  accented  syllable.''  The  Anudatta 
is  marked  in  both  these  Samhitas  with  a  horizontal  stroke 
below  (as  in  the  EV.).^ 

4.  In  the  Samaveda  the  figures  1,  2,  3  are  w^-itten  above 
the  accented  syllable  to  mark  the  Udatta,  the  Svarita,  and 


'  In  thePada  text  on  the  other  hand,  each  word  has  its  own  accent 
only,  unaffected  by  contiguous  words.  The  two  above  hemistichs 
there  read  as  I'ollows  :  agnina  rayim  asnavat  posain  eva  dive^f  dive  ; 
sah  nah  pita  ,fiva  sunave  agne  su^upayanah  bliava. 

-  As  in  kva  =  kua,  viryam  =  viriam. 

*  In  L.  V.  Scliroeder's  editions  of  tliese  two  Samhitas  the  Udatta 
and  the  independent  Svarita  only  are  marked. 

*  When  the  text  of  any  of  the  Samhitas  is  transliterated  in  Roman 
characters,  the  Anudatta  and  the  enclitic  Svarita  are  omitted  as 
unnecessary  because  the  Udatta  itself  is  marked  with  the  sign  of  the 
acute  ;  thus  agnina  becomes  agnina. 


VEDIC   ACCENT  451 

the  Anudatta  respectively  as  representing  three  degrees  of 

pitch  ;  e.  g.  barhisi  =  barhisi  (barhisi).  The  figure  2  is, 
however,  also  used  to  indicate  the  Udatta  when  there  is  no 

3      ■!  , 

following  Svarita ;  e.  g.  gira  =  gira  (gira).  When  there 
are  two  successive  Udattas,  the  second  is  not  marked, 
but   the    following    Svarita    has    2r   written    above;    e.g. 

3    1  2r 

dviso  martyasya  (dvis6  martyasya).  The  independent 
Svarita   is  also  marked  with   2r,  the  preceding  Anudatta 

3k        2r 

being  indicated  by  3k  ;  e.  g.  tanva  =  tanva. 

5.  The  Satapatha  Brahrnana  marks  the  Udatta  only. 
It  does  so  by  means  of  a  horizontal  stroke  below  (like  the 
Anudatta  of  the  KV.) ;  e,  g.  purusah  =  purusah.  Of  two 
or  more  successive  Udattas  only  the  last  is  marked  ;  e.  g. 
agnir  hi  vai  dhur  atha  =  agnir  hi  vai  dhur  atha.  An 
independent  Svarita  is  thrown  back  on  the  preceding 
syllable  in  the  form  of  an  Udatta ;  e.  g.  manusyesu  = 
manusyesu  for  manusyesu.  The  Svarita  produced  by 
change  to  a  semivowel,  by  contraction,  or  the  elision  of 
initial  a  is  similarly  treated  ;  e.  g.  evaitad  =  6vaitad  for 
evaitad  (—  eva  etad). 

6.  Accent  of  single  words.  Every  Vedic  word  is,  as 
a  rule,  accented  and  has  one  main  accent  only.  In  the 
original  text  of  the  EV.  the  only  main  accent  was  the  Udatta 
which,  as  Comparative  Philology  shows,  generally  rests  on 
the  same  syllable  as  it  did  in  the  Indo-European  period  ; 
e.  g.  ta-ta-s  stretched,  Gk.  Ta-rd-<i  ;  janu  n.  Mee,  Gk.  ydvv ; 
a-drs-at,  Gk.  e-SpaK-e  ;  bhara-ta,  Gk.  (f>ip€-Te}  But  in  the 
written  text  of  the  EV.  the  Svarita  appears  to  be  the  main 
accent  in  some  words.  It  then  always  follows  a  y  or  v 
which  represents  original  i  or  u  with  Udatta  ;  e.  g.  rathyam 


'  But  (pepufiepo-i  (bharamanas)  by  the  secondary  Greek  law  of 
accentuation  which  prevents  the  acute  from  going  back  farther  than 
the  third  syllable  from  the  end  of  a  word. 

Gg2 


452  APPENDIX   III 

=  rathi^m ' ;  svar  -  =  siiar  n.  liffht  ;  tanvam  =  tanuam.'' 
Here  the  original  vowel  with  its  Udatta  must  be  restored  in 
pronunciation  except  in  a  very  few  late  passages. 

7.  Double  Accent.  One  form  of  dative  infinitive  and 
two  types  of  syntactical  compounds  have  a  double  accent. 
The  infinitive  in  tavai,  of  which  numerous  examples  occur 
both  in  the  Samhitas  and  the  Brahmanas,  accents  both  the 
first  and  the  last  syllable ;  e.  g.  6-tavai  to  go ;  apa-bhar- 
tavai  to  take  mvay.  Compounds  both  members  of  which 
are  duals  in  form  (186  A  1),  or  in  which  the  first  member 
has  a  genitive  ending  (187  A  6  ft),  accent  bothmembers  ;  e.  g. 
mitra-varuna  Mitra  and  Varum  ;  brhas-pati  lord  of  prayer. 
In  B.  a  double  accent  also  appears  in  the  particle  vava. 

8.  Lack  of  Accent.  Some  words  never  have  an  accent ; 
others  lose  it  under  certain  conditions. 

A.  Always  enclitic  are : 

a.    all  cases  of  the  pronouns  ena  he,  she,  it,  tva  another, 
sama  some ;  and  the  following  forms  of  the  personal  pro-, 
nouns  of  the  first  and  second  persons :  ma,  tva ;   me,  te ; 
nau,    vam;    nas,  vas  (109  a),   and    of   the   demonstrative 
stems  i  and  sa :  im  (111  n.  3)  and  sim  (180). 

h.  The  particles  ea  and,  u  also,  va  or,  iva  Uhe,  gha,  ha 
just,  cid  at  all,  bhala  indeed,  samaha  somehow,  sma  just, 
indeed,  svid  probably. 

B.  Liable  to  loss  of  accent  according  to  syntactical 
position  are : 

a.  vocatives,  unless  beginning  the  sentence  or  Pada. 

6.  finite  verbs  in  principal  clauses,  unless  beginning  the 
sentence  or  Pada. 

c.  oblique  cases  of  the  pronoun  a,  if  unemphatic  (replacing 
a  preceding  substantive)  and  not  beginning  the  sentence  or 
Pada ;  e.  g.  asya  janimani  his  (Agni's)  births  (but  asya 
usasah  of  that  daivn). 

^  Ace.  of  rathi  charioteer. 

^  In  the  TS.  always  written  suvar. 

^  Ace.  of  tanu  body. 


ACCENT  OF  NOMINAL  STEMS  453 

d.  yatha  as  almost  invariably  when,  in  the  sense  of  iva 
like,  it  occurs  at  the  end  of  a  Pada  ;  e.  g.  tayavo  yatha  like 
thieves ;  kam  indeed  always  when  following  nu,  sii,  hi. 

1.    Accentuation  of  Nominal  Stems. 

9.  The  most  important  points  to  be  noted  here  are  the 
following : — 

A.    Primary  Suffixes : 

a.  Stems  in-as  accent  the  root  if  neut.  action  nouns,  but 
the  suffix  if  masc.  agent  nouns ;  e.  g.  ap-as  n.  ivork,  but 
ap-as  active.  The  same  substantive  here,  without  change 
of  meaning,  sometimes  varies  the  accent  with  the  gender  ; 
e.  g.  raks-as  n.,  raks-as  m.  demon. 

b.  Stems  formed  with  the  superlative  suffix  istha  accent 
the  root ;  e.  g.  yajistha  sacrificing  best.  The  only  exceptions 
are  jyestha  eldest  (but  jyestha  greatest)  and  kanistha  youngest 
(but  kanistha  smallest).^  When  the  stem  is  compounded 
with  a  preposition,  the  latter  is  accented  ;  e.  g.  a-gamistha 
coming  best. 

c.  Stems  formed  with  the  comparative  suffix  iyams 
invariably  accent  the  root ;  e.  g,  jav-iyams  swifter.  When 
the  stem  is  compounded  with  a  preposition,  the  latter  is 
accented  ;  e.  g.  prati-cyaviyams  pressing  closer  against. 

d.  Stems  formed  with  tar  generally  accent  the  root  when 
the  meaning  is  participial,  but  the  suffix  when  it  is  purely 
nominal ;  e.  g.  da-tar  giving  (with  ace),  but  da-tar  giver. 

e.  Stems  in  man  when  (neut.)  action  nouns,  accent  the 
root,  but  when  (masc.)  agent  nouns  the  suffix  ;  e.  g.  kar-man 
n.  action,  but  dar-man,  m.  breaker.  The  same  substantive 
here  varies,  in  several  instances,  in  accent  with  the  meaning 
and  gender  (cp.  above,  9  A  a) ;  e.  g.  brahman  n.  prayer, 
brahman  m.  one  who  prays ;  sad-man,  n.  seat,  sad-man,  m. 
sitter.    When  these  stems  are  compounded  with  prepositions, 

'  These  two  exceptions  arise  simply  from  the  desire  to  distinguish 
the  two  me.inings  of  each  of  them.     See  l)elow  (16,  footnote  2). 


454  APPENDIX   III 

the  latter  are  nearly  alwaj^s  accented  ;  e  g.  pra-bharman, 
n.  presentation. 

B.  Secondary  Suiflxes: 

a.  Stems  in  ^n  always  accent  the  suffix :  e.  g.  asv-in 
possessing  horses. 

h.  Stems  in  tama,  if  superlatives,  hardly  ever  accent  the 
suffix  (except  puru-tama  very  mamj,  ut-tama  highest,  ^a^vat- 
tama  most  frequent),  but  if  ordinals,  the  final  syllable  of  the 
suffix ;  e.  g.  ^ata-tama  hundredth. 

c.  Stems  in  ma,  whether  superlatives  or  ordinals,  regularly 
accent  the  suffix  ;  e.  g.  adha-ma  lowest ;  asta-ma  eighth : 
except  anta-ma  next  (but  twice  anta-ma). 

2.    Accentuation  of  Compounds. 

10.  Stated  generally,  the  rule  is  that  iteratives,  possessives, 
and  governing  compounds  accent  the  first  member,  while 
determinatives  (Karmadharayas  and  Tatpurusas),  and  regu- 
larly formed  co-ordinatives  accent  the  last  member  (usually 
on  its  final  syllable).  Simple  words  on  becoming  members 
of  compounds  generally  retain  their  original  accent.  Some, 
however,  alwa5^s  change  it :  thus  visva  regularly  becomes 
visva ;  others  do  so  in  certain  combinations  only :  thus 
piirva  prior  becomes  piirva  in  purva-cltti  f.  Jirst  thought, 
purva-piti  f.  frst  draught,  purva-huti  first  invocation ; 
m6dha  sacrifice  shifts  its  accent  in  medha-pati  lord  of 
sacrifice  and  medha-sati  f.  reception  of  the  sacrifice,  and 
vira  hero  in  puru-vira  possessed  of  many  men  and  su-vira 
heroic.  An  adjective  compound  may  shift  its  accent  from 
one  member  to  another  on  becoming  a  substantive  or  a 
proper  name  ;  e.  g.  su-krta  toell  done,  but  su-krta,  n.  good 
deed ;  a-raya  niggardly,  but  a-raya  m.  name  of  a  demon. 

a.  Iteratives  accent  the  first  member  only,  the  two  words 
being  separated  b}'  Avagraha  in  the  Pada  text,  like  the 
members  of  other  compounds  ;  e.g.  ahar-ahar  day  after  day ; 
jAd-j ad  whatever ;  jAtha-jatha,  as  in  each  case ;  adya-adya, 
svah-svah  on  each  to-day,  on  each  to-morrow ;  pra-pra  foiih 
and  again  ;  piba-piba  drink  again  and  again. 


ACCENTUATION   OF   COMPOUNDS  455 

6.  In  governing  compounds  the  first  member,  when  it  is 
a  verbal  noun  (except  siksa-nara  helping  men)  is  invariably 
accented  ;  e.  g.  trasa-dasyu  terrifying  foes,  name  of  a  man  ; 
present  or  aorist  participles  place  the  accent,  wherever  it 
may  have  been  originally,  on  their  final  syllable;  e.g. 
tarad-dvesas  overcoming  (tarat)/ocs.  When  the  first  member 
is  a  prejjosition,  either  that  word  is  accented,  or  the  final 
syllable  of  the  compound  if  it  ends  in  a ;  e.  g.  abhi-dyu 
directed  to  heaven,  but  adhas-pad-a  under  the  feet ;  anu-kama 
according  to  wish  (kama). 

c.  Bahuvrlhis  normally  accent  their  first  member  ;  e.  g. 
raja-putra  having  kings  as  sons  (but  raja-putra  son  of  a  Icing) ; 
visvato-mukha  facing  in  all  directions ;  saha-vatsa  accom- 
panied hy  her  calf. 

a.  But  about  one-eighth  of  all  Bahuvrihis  accent  the  second  member 
chiefly  on  the  final  syllable).  This  is  commonly  the  case  when  the 
first  member  is  a  dissyllabic  adjective  ending  in  i  or  u,  invariably  in 
the  RV.  when  it  is  purii  or  bahii  much  ;  e.  g.  tuvi-dyumnd  having  great 
glory  ;  vibhu-krdtu  having  great  strength  ;  puru-putr4  having  many  sons  ; 
bahv-auna  having  much  food}  This  also  is  the  regular  accentuation 
when  the  first  member  is  dvi  t^vo,  tri  three,  dus  ill,  su  ivell,  or  the 
privative  particle  a  or  an  ;  ^  e.  g.  dvi-pdd  two-footed,  tri-nabhi  having 
three  naves,  dur-m^nman  ill-disposed,  su-bhi,ga  well-endoKed,  a-ddnt 
toothless,  a-phala  lacking  fruit  (phala). 

d.  Determinatives  accent  the  final  member  (chiefly  on  the 
final  syllable). 

1.  Ordinary  Karmadharayas  accent  the  final  syllable ; 
e,  g.  prathama-ja  first-born,  pratar-yiij  early  yoked,  maha- 
dhana  great  spoil.  But  when  the  second  member  ends  in 
i,  man,  van,  or  is  a  gerundive  (used  as  a  n.  substantive), 
the  penultimate  syllable  is  accented  ;  e.g.  dur-grbhi  Jtard  to 
hold  ;  su-tarman  crossing  ivell ;  raghu-patvan  swift-fiying  j 
purva-p6ya,  n.  precedence  in  drinking. 

'  The  later  Samhitas  tend  to  follow  the  general  rule  ;  e.  g.  puni- 
naman  l,SV.)  many -named. 

"  Bahuvrihis  formed  with  a  or  an  are  almost  invariably  accented 
on  the  final  syllable  as  a  distinction  from  Kaimadharayas  (which 
normally  accent  the  first  syllable,  as  6-manusa mftwman) ;  e.g.  a-matr6. 
measureless. 


456  APPENDIX   III 

a.  The  liist  member  is,  however,  accented  under  the  following 
conditions.  It  is  generally  accented  when  it  is  an  adverbial  word 
qualifying  a  2)ast  participle  in  ta  or  na  or  a  verbal  noun  in  tl ;  e.  g. 
diir-hita  faring  ill ;  sadhd-stuti  joint  iwaise.  It  is  almost  invariably 
accented  when  it  is  the  privitive  particle  a  or  an '  compounded  with 
a  participle,  adjective,  or  substantive ;  e.  g.  an-adant  not  eating, 
d-vidvams  not  knowing,  d-krta  not  done,  d-tandra  imwearied,  d-kumara 
not  a  child.  The  privative  particle  is  also  regularly  accented,  when  it 
negatives  a  compound;  e.g.  6n-asva-da  not  giving  a  horse,  dn-agni- 
dagdha  not  burnt  with  fire, 

2.  Ordinary  Tatpurusas  accent  the  final  syllable ;  e.  g. 
gotra-bhid  opening  the  cow-pens,  agnim-indha  firc-hindling, 
bhadra-vadin  uttering  auspicious  cries ;  uda-megha  shower 
oftvater.  But  when  the  second  member  is  an  agent  noun 
in  ana,  an  action  noun  in  ya,  or  an  adjective  in  i,  or  van, 
the  radical  syllable  of  that  member  is  accented  ;  e.  g.  deva- 
madana  exhilarating  the  gods ;  ahi-hatya  n.  slaughter  of  the 
dragon  ;  pathi-raksi  protecting  the  road ;  soma-pavan  Soma- 
drinhing. 

a.  The  first  member  is,  however,  accented  when  it  is  dependent  on 
past  passive  participles  in  ta  and  na  or  on  action  nouns  in  ti ;  e.  g. 
devd-hita  ordained  by  the  gods,  dh6na-sati  acquisition  of  wealth.  It  is 
usually  also  accented,  if  dependent  on  p^ti  lord  ;  e.  g.  grha-pati  lord  of 
the  house.  Some  of  these  compounds  with  pati  accent  the  second 
member  with  its  original  accent ;  some  others  in  the  later  Samhitas, 
conforming  to  the  general  rule,  accent  it  on  the  final  syllable ; 
thus  apsara-pati  (AV.)  lord  of  the  Ax>sarases,  ahar-pati  (^MS.)  lord  of  day, 
nadi-pati  (VS.)  lord  of  rivers, 

j8.  A  certain  number  of  Tatpurusas  of  syntactical  origin,  having 
a  genitive  case-ending  in  the  first  member  nearly  always  followed  by 
p6ti,  are  doubly  accented  ;  e.  g.  bfhas-pati  lord  of  iwayer.  Other  are 
apam-nfipat  son  o/"tya<eys,  nara-simsa  (for  naram-s^msa)  2'»'«!se  of  men, 
<5unah-86pa  Dog''s  tail,  name  of  a  man.  The  analogy  of  these  is 
followed  by  some  Tatpurusas  without  case-ending  in  the  first  member  : 
sdci-pdti  lord  of  might ;  tdnu-ndpat  son  of  himself  (tanii) ;  nf-sdmsa 
praise  of  men. 


^  Sometimes,  however,  the  first  syllable  of  the  second  member  is 
accented  ;  e.  g.  a-jira  imaging  ;  a-mitra  m.  enemy  {non-friend :  raitrd) ; 
a-mrta  immortal  (from  mrtd). 


ACCENTUATION   OF   COMPOUNDS  457 

c.  Regularly  formed  Dvandvas  (ISO  A  2.  3)  accent  the 
final  syllable  of  the  stem  irrespective  of  the  original  accent 
of  the  last  member  ;  e.  g.  ajavayah.  m.  pi.  goats  and  sheep  ; 
aho-ratrani  days  and  nights ;  ista-purtam  n.  lohat  is  sacrificed 
and  presented. 

a.  The  very  rare  cadverbial  Dvandvas  accent  the  first  member: 
d,har-divi  ^  day  hij  day,  saydm-pratar  evening  and  morning. 

0.  Co-ordinatives  consisting  of  the  names  of  two  deities,  each  dual  in 
form  (Devata-dvandvas),  accent  both  members;  e.g.  indra-vd,runa 
Indra  and  Varuna ;  siirya-masa  Sun  and  Moon.  A  few  others,  formed 
of  words  that  are  not  the  names  of  deities,  are  similarly  accented ; 
e.  g.  turvasa-yadu  Turvas'a  and  Yadu  ;  mat^ra-pitdra  mother  and  father.' 


3.   Accent  in  Declension. 

11.  a.  The  vocative,  when  accented  at  all  (18),  invariably 
has  the  acute  on  the  first  syllable  ;  e.  g.  pitar  (N.  pita), 
ddva  (N.  deva-s).  The  regular  vocative  of  dyu  (dyav)  is 
dyaus,  i.  e.  diaus  (which  irregularly  retains  the  s  of  the 
nom.  :  cp.  Gk.  Zev),  but  the  accent  of  the  N.,  dyaus, 
usually  appears  instead. 

b.  In  the  a  and  a  declensions  the  accent  remains  on  the 
same  syllable  throughout  (except  the  vocative) ;  e.  g.  deva-s, 
deva-sya,  deva-nam.  This  rule  includes  monosyllabic 
stems,  pronouns,  the  numeral  dva,  and  radical  a  stems  ; 
e.  g.  from  ma  :  maya,  ma-hyam,  may-i  ;  from  ta  :  ta-sya, 
t6-sam,  ta-bhis  ;  from  dva  :  dva-bhyam,  dvayos  ;  from 
ja  m.  f.  offspring:  ja-bhyam,  ja-bhis,  ja-bhyas,  ja-su. 

a.  The  cardinal  stems  in  a,  pdiaca,  ndva,  dasa  (and  its  compounds) 
shift  the  accent  to  the  vowel  before  the  endings  bhis,  bhyas,  su,  and 
to  the  gen,  ending  nam  ;  asta  shifts  it  to  all  the  endings  and  saptd  to 
the  gen.  ending;  e.  g.  pafica-bhis,  panca-nam  ;  saptd.-bhis,  sapta-nam; 
asta-bbis,  asta-bhyds,  asta-nam. 


'  This  is  perhaps  rather  an  irregular  iterative  in  which  the  first 
member  is  repeated  by  a  synonym. 

^  Occasionally  these  compounds  become  assimilated  to  the  normal 
type  by  losing  the  accent  and  even  the  inflexion  of  the  first  member  ; 
e.  g.  indragni  Indra  and  Agni,  indra-vayu  Indra  and  Vdyv. 


468  APPENDIX   III 

/9.  The  pronoun  a  iliis,  though  sometimes  conforming  to  tliis  rule 
(e.  g.  a-smai,  d-sya,  a-bhis).  is  usually  treated  like  monosyllables  not 
ending  in  a  ;  e.  g.  a-sya,  e-sam,  a-sam, 

c.  When  the  final  syllable  of  the  stem  is  accented,  the 
acute  is  liable  to  shift  (except  in  the  a  declension)  to  the 
endings  in  the  weak  cases. 

1.  In  monosyllabic  stems  (except  those  ending  in  a)  this 
is  the  rule;^  e.g.  dhi  f.  thought',  dhiy-a,  dhi-bhis,  dhi- 
nam ;  bhu  f.  earth  :  bhuv-as,  bhuv-6s ;  nau  f.  ship  :  nav-a, 
nau-bhis,  nau-sii  (Gk.  vav-at) ;  dant,  m.  tooth :  dat-a, 
dad-bhis.^ 

There  are  about  a  dozen  exceptions  to  this  rule  :  go  cow,  dyo  sky ; 
nf  man,  str  star ;  ksam  earth  ;  tan  succession,  ran  joy,  vdn  icood  ;  vi  m. 
bird ;  vip  rod ;  svar  light ;  e.  g.  g^v-a,  gSv-am,  go-bhis ;  dyav-i, 
dyu-bhis  ;  nir-e,  nf-bhis,  nf-su  (but  nar-am  and  nr-nam)  ;  stf-bhis  ; 
ksdm-i ;  tdn-a  (also  tan-a")  ;  r^n-e,  rdm-su ;  vam-su  (but  van-am)  ; 
vi-bhis,  vi-bhyas  (but  vl-nam) ;  G.  vip-as  ;  siir-as  i^but  sur-6) ;  also  the 
dative  infinitives  badh-e  to  press  and  vah-e  to  convey.  The  irregular 
accentuation  of  a  few  other  monosyllabic  stems  is  due  to  their  being 
reduced  forms  of  dissyllables  ;  these  are  dru  wood  (daru),  snu  summit 
(sanu),  svan  dog  (Gk.  kvcov),  yun  ^weak  stem  of  yuvan  young)  ;  e.  g. 
dru-na  ;  snu-su  ;  sixna,  svd.-bhis  ;  y^n-a. 

2.  When  the  final  accented  syllable  loses  its  vowel  either 
by  syncope  or  change  to  a  semivowel,  the  acute  is  thrown 
forward  on  a  vowel  ending  ;  e.  g.  from  mahiman  greatness : 
mahimna  ;  agni  fire  :  agny-6s ;  dhenii  coiv :  dhenv-a  ; 
y&dhuhride:  vadhv-ai  (AV.) ;  -pitf  Jather :  pitr-a. 

a.  Polysyllabic  stems  in  f,  u,  f  and,  in  the  RV.,  usually  those  in  i, 
throw  the  acute  on  the  ending  of  the  gen.  pi.  also,  even  though  the 
final  vowel  of  the  stem  here  retains  its  syllabic  character;  e.g. 
agni-nami  dhenu-nam,  datf-nam,  bahvi-nam  (cp.  11  b  a), 

3.  Present  participles  in  at  and  ant  throw  the  acute 
forward  on  vowel  endings  in  the  weak  cases  ;  e.  g.  tud-ant 
striking :    tudat-a    (but    tudad-bhis).      This    rule    is   also 


'  At  the  end  of  a  compound  a  monosyllabic  stem  loses  this  accentua- 
tion ;  e.  g.  su-dhi  tcise,  sudhf-nam. 


ACCENT   IN   DECLENSION  459 

followed  by  the  old  participles  mahant  great  and  brhant 
lofty  ;  e.  g.  mahat-a  (but  mahad-bhis). 

4.  In  the  EV.  derivatives  formed  with  accented  -anc 
throw  the  acute  forward  on  vowel  endings  in  the  weak  cases 
when  the  final  syllable  contracts  to  ic  or  uc  ;  e.g.  praty-anc 
turned  towards :  pratic-a(but  pratyak-su) ;  anv-aho  following : 
anuc-as  ;  hut  pr&ho  forward:  prac-i.^ 

4.   Verbal  Accent. 

12.  a.  The  augment  invariably  bears  the  acute,  if  the 
verb  is  accented  at  all  (19) ;  e.  g.  inipf.  a-bhavat ;  aor. 
a-bhut ;  plup.  a-jagan  ;  cond.  a-bharisyat.  The  accentua- 
tion of  the  forms  in  which  the  augment  is  dropped  (used 
also  as  injunctives)  is  as  follows.  The  imperfect  accents  the 
same  sj'llable  as  the  present ;  e.  g.  bharat :  bharati ;  bhinat : 
bhinatti.  The  pluperfect  accents  the  root ;  e.  g.  cakan 
(3.  s.) :  namamas,  tastambhat ;  tatananta ;  but  in  the 
3.  pi.  also  occur  cakrpanta,  dadhrsanta. 

The  aorist  is  variously  treated.  The  s  and  the  is  forms 
accent  the  root ;  e.  g.  vam-s-i  (van  win)  ;  sams-is-am.  The 
root  aorist  (including  the  passive  form)  accents  the  radical 
vowel  in  the  sing,  active,  but  the  endings  elsewhere  ;  e.  g. 
3.  s.  vark  (\/vrj);  pass.  v6d-i ;  2.  s.  mid.  nut-thas.  The 
aorists  formed  with  -a  "  or  -sa  accent  those  syllables  ;  e.  g. 
ruham,  vidat ;  budhanta ;  dhuk-sa-nta.  The  reduplicated 
aorist  accents  either  the  reduplicated  syllable  ;  e.  g.  ninasas, 
piparat,  jijanan  ;  or  the  root,  as  piparat,  sisnathat. 

h.  Present  System.  The  accent  in  the  a  conjugation 
(as  in  the  a  declension)  remains  on  the  same  syllable 
throughout:  on  the  radical  syllable  in  verbs  of  the  first  and 
fourth  classes,  on  the  affix  in  the  sixth  (125) ;  e.  g.  bhavati  ; 
nahyati ;  tudati. 


>  In  the  other  Samhitas,  however,  the  accent  is  generally  retained 
on  the  stem  ;  tlius  the  AV.  forms  the  f.  stem  pratic-i  (RV.  pratTc-f). 

^  In  the  a  aorist  several  forms  are  found  accenting  tlie  root;  e.g. 
aranta,  sddatam,  s6.nat. 


460  APPENDIX   III 

The  graded  conjugation  accents  the  stem  in  the  strong 
forms  (126),  but  the  endings  in  the  weak  forms.  In  the 
strong  forms  the  radical  syllable  is  accented  in  the  second ' 
and  the  reduplicative  syllable  in  the  third  class ;  ^  and  the 
stem  affix  in  the  fifth,  eighth,  seventh,  and  ninth  classes  ; 
e.  g.  as-ti,  as-a-t,  as-tu  ;  bibhar-ti ;  kr-no-ti,  kr-nav-a-t ; 
man-av-a-te ;  yu-na-j-mi,  yu-naj-a-t ;  grh-na-ti,  grbh- 
na-s  (2.  s.  sub.);  but  ad-dhi,  ad-yur;  bi-bhr-masi ;  ^ 
kr-nv-6,  kr-nu-hi  ;  van-u-yama,  van-v-antu  ;  *  yunk-t6, 
yuhk-sva ;  gr-ni-masi,  gr-ni-hi. 

c.  Perfect.  The  strong  forms  (the  sing.  1.  2,  3.  ind.  and 
3.  impv.  act.  and  the  whole  subjunctive)  accent  the  radical 
syllable,  the  weak  forms  (cp.  140)  the  endings  ;  e.  g.  cakara ; 
jabhar-a-t,  vavart-a-ti ;  mumok-tu ;  but  cakr-ur,  cakr- 
mahe ;  vavrt-yam ;  mu-mug-dhi.  The  participle  accents 
the  suffix  ;  e.  g.  cakr-vams,  cakr-ana. 

d.  Aorist.  The  injunctive  is  identical  in  accentuation 
(as  well  as  form)  with  the  unaugmented  indicative  (see 
above,  12). 

a.  Tlie  root  aor.  accents  the  radical  syllable  in  the  subjunctive  ; 
6.  g.  kdr-a-t,  srav-a-tas,  gam-a-nti,  bhdj-a-te ;  but  the  endings  in 
the  opt.  and  impv.  (except  the  3.  s.  act.),^  and  the  suffix  in  the 
participle  ;6  e.g.  as-yam,  as-i-m^hi  ;  kr-dhi,  ga-tam,  bhu-ta  i^but  3.  s. 
sro-tu),  kr-svd  ;  bhid-ant,  budh-ana. 


^  Eleven  verbs  of  this  class  accent  the  root  throughout :  as  sit, 
id  praise,  ir  set  in  motion,  is  rule,  caks  see,  taik.s  fashion,  tra,  protect,  nims 
kiss,  vas  wear,  si  lie,  su  briny  forth  ;  c.  g.  saye,  &c. 

Occasionally  the  2.  s.  impv.  mid.  accents  the  root  in  other  verbs 
also  ;  e.  g.  yak-sva  (\/yaj). 

^  Four  verbs,  ci  note,  mad  exhilarate,  yu  separate,  hu  sacrifice,  accent 
the  radical  syllable  ;  e.  g.  juho-ti.  A  few  other  verbs  do  so  in  isolated 
forms  ;  e.  g.  bibhfir-ti  (usually  bibhar-ti). 

3  In  the  third  class  the  reduplicative  syllable  is  accented  in  the 
weak  forms  also  if  the  ending  begins  with  a  vowel ;  e.g.  bi-bhr-ati. 

*  In  the  second,  fifth,  seventh,  eighth,  and  ninth  classes  the  final  syl- 
lable of  the  3.  pi.  mid.  is  irregularly  accented  in  rihate  (beside  rih&te) ; 
krnv-at6,  vrnv-at6,  sprnv-at§,  tanv-ate,  manv-at6  ;  bhunj-at6  (beside 
biiuSj-dte)  ;  pun-at6,  rin-at6. 

^  The  radical  syllable  (in  its  strong  form)  is  also  in  several  instances 
accented  in  the  2.  pi.  act.  ;  e.g.  kar-ta  beside  kr-td;  gan-ta,  gdn-tana 
beside  ga-td,  &c. 

®  In  the  mid.  part,  the  root  is,  in  several  instances,  accented  ;  e.  g. 
dyut-ana.  ' 


ACCENT   IN   CONJUGATION  461 

13.  The  s  and  is  aor.  accent  tlie  root  in  the  subjunctive  but  the 
endings  in  the  opt.  and  impv. ;  e.  g.  yfik-s-a-t  (Vyb,]),  b6dh-is-a-t ; 
but  bhak-s-iya  (Vbhaj),  dhuk-s-i-m^hi  (Vduh),  edh-is-i-y^  (AV.) ; 
avid-dhi,  avis-tam.'  The  s  aor.  accents  tlie  root  in  the  act.  part., 
but  nearly  always  the  suffix  in  the  irregularly  formed  middle  ; "  e.  g. 
dik-s-ant  (\/dah),  arca-s-an£. 

7.  The  a  aorist  accents  the  thematic  vowel  throughout  the  moods 
(as  in  the  unaugmented  indicative)  and  the  part.  ;  e.  g.  vidat ; 
vid^yara  ;  ruhd-tam ;  trpdnt,  guha-mana.' 

6.  The  sa  aor.  accents  the  sutKx  in  the  impv.  :  dhak-s£-sva  (v^dah). 
The  same  accentuation  would  no  doubt  appear  in  the  subjunctive  and 
optative,  but  no  examples  of  those  moods  (nor  of  the  part.)  occur. 

(.  In  the  reduplicated  aor.  the  treatment  of  the  subj.  and  opt.  is 
uncertain  because  no  normally  formed  accented  example  occurs;  but 
in  the  impv.  the  ending  is  accented  ;  e.  g.  jigr-tgm,  didhr-t^.* 

e.  Future.  The  accent  in  all  forms  of  this  tense  remains 
on  the  suffix  sya  or  i-sya ;  e.  g.  e-syami ;  kar-i-syati ; 
karisyant. 

/.  Secondary  conjugations.  As  all  these  (except  the 
primary  intensive)  belong  to  the  a  conjugation,  they  accent 
the  same  syllable  throughout.  The  causative  (168)  accents 
the  penultimate  syllable  of  the  stem,  as  krodh-aya-ti  enrages  ; 
the  passive,  the  secondary  intensive  (172),  and  the  denomina- 
tive (175),  accent  the  suffix  ya  ;  e.g.  pan-ya-te  is  admired; 
rerih-ya-te  licJcs  rcjcaiedJij  ;  gopa-ya-nti  they  jprotectJ'  The 
desiderative  (169)  accents  the  reduplicative  syllable ;  e.  g. 
pi-pri-sa-ti  desires  to  please.  The  primary  intensive  agrees 
with  the  third  conjugational  class  in  accenting  the  reduplica- 
tive syllable  in  the  strong  forms,  but  the  endings  with 
initial  consonant  in  the  weak  forms  of  the  indie,  act. ;  e,  g. 
j6-havi-ti,  jar-bhr-tas,  but  3.  pi.  varvrt-ati ;  in  the  mid. 
ind.  the  reduplicative  syllable  is  more  frequently  accented 

1  No  accented  impv.  forms  occur  in  the  s.  aor.  In  the  sis  aor.  the 
only  accented  modal  form  occurring  is  the  impv. :  ya-sis-tani. 

*  Neither  the  is  nor  the  sis  aor.  forms  participles. 

'  But  the  root  is  accented,  in  several  imperatives  and  participles, 
e.  g.  s&na,  sMatam,  khydta ;  sadant,  d^samana. 

*  No  participial  form  occurs  in  this  aor. 

*  A  certain  number  of  unmistakable  denominatives,  however,  have 
the  causative  accent ;  e.  g.  mantra-yati  takes  counsel  (mantra). 


462  APPENDIX   III 

than  not  ;  e.  g.  t6-tik-te,  less  often  ne-nik-t6.  In  the  subj. 
and  part,  the  reduplicative  syllable  is  regularly  accented  ; 
e.  g.  jan-ghan-a-t,  jan-ghan-a-nta ;  c6kit-at,  c6kit-ana. 
The  accentuation  of  the  imperative  ^  was  probably  the  same 
as  that  of  the  present  reduplicating  class  (12  b) ;  but  the 
only  accented  forms  occurring  are  in  the  2.  s.  act.,  as 
jagr-hi,  carkr-tat. 

5.   Accent  of  Nominal  Verb  Forms. 

13.  a.  Tense  Participles  when  compounded  with  one  or 
more  prepositions  retain  their  original  accent  (while  the 
prepositions  lose  theirs) ;  e.  g.  apa-gachant  f/oino  away, 
vi-pra-yantah  advancing,  pary-a-vivrtsan  visiting  to  turn 
round;  apa-gacha-mana ;  apa-jaganvaras,  apa-jagm-ana. 

a.  A  single  preposition,  or  the  first  of  two,  not  infrequently 
becomes  separated  by  the  interposition  of  one  or  more  words  or  by 
being  placed  after  the  participle.  It  is  then  treated  as  independent 
and  recovers  its  accent  ;  e.  g.  dpa  drlhani  dardrat  hxirsiing  strongholds 
asunder ;  a  ca  para  oa  pathibhis  c&rantam  icandering  hither  and  thither 
on  his  paths ;  m^dhu  bibhrata  upa  bringing  sweetness  near ;  pra  vayam 
uj-jihanah  ,//?/iH(7  iq)  to  a  branch  ;  avasrjann  xipa  hestowing.  Occasionally 
an  immediately  preceding  preposition  is  not  compounded  with  the 
participle  and  is  then  also  accented  ;  e.g.  abhi  daksat  burning  around; 
vf  vidvan  -  discriminating  ;  abhf  a-cdrantah  approaching. 

h.  On  the  other  hand,  the  past  passive  participle,"  when 
compounded  with  one  or  more  prepositions,  generally  loses 
its  accent ;  e.  g.  ni-hita  deposited^  When  there  are  two 
prepositions  the  first  remains  unaccented  ;  e.  g.  sam-a-krtam 
accumulated  ;  or  the  first  may  be  separated  and  independently 
accented  ;  e.  g.  pra  yat  samudra  ahitah  when  dispatched 
forth  to  the  ocean. 


*  No  accented  form  of  the  optative  occurs. 

2  Probably  in  distinction  from  vividvan  simple  reduplicated 
participle  of  vid  find. 

^  Which  itself  is  always  accented  on  the  final  syllable ;  e.  g.  ga-td, 
pati-t&,  chin-nfi. 

*  In  several  instances,  however,  it  retains  its  accent ;  e.  g.  nis-krtd 
prepared.  This  is  the  case  with  prepositions  that  are  not  used 
independently. 


ACCENT   OF  NOMINAL   VERB   FORMS       463 

r.  Gerundives  in  ya  (or  tya)  and  tva  accent  the  root : 
e.  g.  caks-ya  io  he  seen,  sru-t-ya  to  he  heard,  earkr-tya  to  he 
praised,  vak-tva  to  he  said  ;  those  in  ayya,  enya,  aniya 
accent  the  penultimate  of  the  suffix ;  e.  g.  pan-ayya  to  he 
admired,  iks-enya  icorthi/  to  he  seen,  upa-jiv-aniya  (AV.)  to 
he  suhsisted  on ;  while  those  in  tavya  accent  the  final 
syllable :  jan-i-tavya  (AV.)  to  he  horn.  When  compounded 
with  prepositions  (here  always  inseparable)  gerundives  nearly 
always  retain  the  accent  of  the  simple  form  ;  e.  g.  pari- 
caks-ya  to  he  despised ;  abhy-a-yams6nya  to  he  drawn  near ; 
a-mantraniya  (AV.)  to  he  addressed. 

14.  Infinitives  are  as  a  rule  accented  like  ordinary  cases 
that  would  be  formed  from  the  same  stem. 

a.  Dative  infinitives  from  stems  in  i,  ti,  as,  van  accent 
the  suffix  ;  those  in  dhyai,  the  preceding  thematic  a ;  and 
those  formed  from  the  root,  the  ending  ;  e.  g.  drsay-e  to  see, 
pitay-e  to  drinl;  caras-e  ^  to  move,  da-van-e "  to  give, 
tur-van-e "  to  overcome  ;  iy-a-dhyai  '^  to  go  ;  drs-6  to  see. 

a.  When  radical  infinitives  are  compounded  with  prejoositions  tlie 
root  is  accented  ;  e.g.  sam-idh-e  to  kindle,  abhi-pra-caks-e  ^  to  see. 

h.  The  dative  infinitive  from  stems  in  man,  the  accusative 
and  the  abl.  gen.  from  roots,  and  all  from  stems  in  tu 
accent  the  root ;  e.  g.  da-man-e  io  give ;  ^  siibh-am  to  shine, 
a-sad-am  to  sit  down ;  ava-pad-as  to  fall  down ;  da-tum 
to  give,  gan-tos  to  go,  bhar-tav-e  to  hear,  gan-tav-ai '  to  go. 

a.  When  compounded,  infinitives  from  tu  stems  accent  the  preposi- 
tion;' e.g.  sam-kar-tum  to  collect;   ni-dha-tos  to  put  dorvn  ;   &pi-dha- 


^  In  these  the  root  is  sometimes  accented,  as  cdks-as-e  Io  see. 

*  Tliis  infinitive  also  appears  with  independently  accented  preposi- 
tions ;  pra  davdne  and  abhi  pv&  davdrue. 

^  The  root  is  once  accented  in  dhiir-vane  io  injure. 

*  In  these  the  root  is  sometimes  accented  ;  e.  g.  gdma-dhyai. 

"  The  regular  accentuation  of  monosyUabic  stems  when  compounded  : 
cp.  lie,  1. 

*  But  vid-m6n-e  io  know, 

"^  With  a  secondary  accent  on  the  final  syllable  :  cp.  above,  7. 

*  But  when  the  preposition  is  detached   the  infinitive  retains  its 
accent  ;  e.  g.  prd  da^tise  datave  to  present  to  the  worshipper. 


464  APPENDIX   III 

tav-e  to  cover  up  ;  ^pa-bhar-tavdi '  to  he  taken  away.  Wlien  there  are  two 
prepositions  the  first  may  be  separate  and  independently  accented  ; 
e.  g.  anu  prd-volhum  to  advance  along,  vi  prfi-sartave  to  spread. 

15.  Gerunds  formed  with  tvi,  tva,  tvaya  accent  the 
suffix,  but  when  they  are  compounded  with  prepositions 
(here  always  insej^arable)  and  formed  with  ya  or  tya,  they 
accent  the  root ;  e,  g.  bhu-tva  having  become,  ga-tvi  and 
ga-tvaya  having  gone ;  sam-grbh-ya  having  gathered,  upa- 
srii-tya  (AV.)  having  overcome. 

16.  Case  forms  used  as  adverbs  frequently  shift  their 
accent  to  indicate  clearly  a  change  of  meaning.  ^  The 
accusative  neuter  form  is  here  the  commonest ;  e.  g.  dravat 
quicMy,  but  dravat  running ;  aparam  later,  but  aparam  as 
n.  adj.  ;  uttaram  higher,  but  uttaram  as  n.  adj. ;  adverbs  in 
vat  e.  g.  pratna-vat  as  of  old,  but  the  ace.  n.  of  adjectives 
in  vant  do  not  accent  the  suffix.  Examples  of  other  cases 
are :  div-a  hy  day,  but  div-a  through  heaven  ;  aparaya  for 
the  future,  but  aparaya  to  the  later ;  sanat  from  of  old, 
but  sanat  from  the  old. 

6.    Sandhi  Accent. 

17.  1.  When  two  vowels  combine  so  as  to  form  a  long 
vowel  or  diphthong,  the  latter  receives  the  Udatta,  if  either 
or  both  the  original  vowels  had  it ;  e.  g.  agat  =  a  agat ; 
nudasvatha  =  nudasva  atha  ;  kv6t  =  kva  it ;  ^  nantarah 
=  na  antarah. 

a.  But  the  contraction  of  i  i  is  accented  as  i,*  the  enclitic  Svarita 
(i  i)  having  here  ousted  the  preceding  Udatta  ;  e.  g.  diviva  ^  =  divi  iva.® 


1  Retaining  the  secondary  accent  on  the  final  syllable. 

2  Such  a  shift  is  found  in  nouns  to  indicate  either  a  simple  change 
of  meaning,  e.g.  jy^stha  greatest,  but  jyesth^  eldest;  or  a  change  of 
category  also,  e.g.  gomati  rich  in  cows,  but  gomati  name  of  a  river; 
rajaputra  son  of  a  king,  but  rajaputra  having  sons  as  kings. 

^  Eut  when  a  Svarita  on  a  final  vowel  is  followed  by  an  unaccented 
initial  vowel,  it  of  course  remains,  e.  g.  kveyatha  =  kva  iyatha. 

*  In  the  RV.  and  AV.,  but  not  in  the  Taittirlya  texts,  which  follow 
the  general  rule. 

^  RV.  and  AV.,  but  diviva  in  the  Taittirlya  texts. 

*  This  is  the  praslista  or  contracted  Svarita  of  the  Prati^akhyas. 


SANDHI  ACCENT  465 

2.  When  i  and  u  with  Udatta  are  changed  to  y  and  v, 
a  following  unaccented  vowel  receives  the  Svarita  ;  ^  e.g. 
vy  anat  =  vi  anat.  Here  the  Svarita  assumes  the  appear- 
ance of  an  independent  accent ;  but  the  uncontracted  form 
with  the  Udatta  must  almost  invariably  be  pronounced  in 
the  RV. 

3.  When  accented  a  is  elided  it  throws  back  its  Udatta 
on  unaccented  e  or  o ;  e.  g.  sunav6  ^gne  =  sundve  agne ; 
v6  ,jvasah  =  vo  avasah.  But  when  unaccented  a  is  elided, 
it  changes  a  preceding  Udatta  to  Svarita  ;  -  e.  g.  s6  ^dhamdh 
=  s6  adhamdh.-^ 


7.   Sentence  Accent. 

18.  The  vocative,  whether  it  be  a  single  word  or  a 
compound  expression,  can  be  accented  on  its  first  syllable 
only. 

a.  It  retains  its  accent  only  at  the  beginning  of  a  sentence 
or  Pada,*  that  is,  when  having  the  full  force  of  the  case  it 
occupies  the  most  emphatic  position  ;  e.  g.  agne,  supayan6 
bhava  0  Agni,  he  easy  of  access ;  urjo  napat  sahasavan  ^ 
0  mighty  son  of  strength.  This  rule  also  applies  to  doubly 
accented  dual  compounds  ;  e.  g.  mitra-varuna  °  0  Mitra 
and  Varum.  Two  or  more  vocatives  at  the  beginning  of 
a  sentence  are  all  accented  ;  e.  g.  adite,  mitra,  varuna 
0  Acliti,  0  Mitra,  0  Varum.  Two  accented  vocatives  are 
sometimes  applicable  to  the  same  person  ;  e.  g.  urjo  napad, 


^  This  is  the  ksaipra  or  quickly  pronounced  Svarita  of  the  Pi-ati^akhyas. 

^  This  is  the  a'bhinihita  Svarita  of  the  Prati^akhyas. 

^  Here  the  Svarita  (6  a)  has  ousted  the  preceding  Udatta. 

*  This  applies  to  the  second  as  well  as  the  first  Pada  of  a  hemistich, 
indicating  that  both  originally  had  a  mutually  independent  character, 
which  is  obscured  by  the  strict  application  of  Sandhi  and  the  absence 
of  any  break  in  marking  the  accent,  at  the  internal  junction  of  the 
Padas  of  a  hemistich. 

°  The  corresponding  nom.  would  be  lirjo  uapat  sdhasava. 

•■  The  nom.  is  mitra- vfiruna. 
i8i»  H  h 


466  APPENDIX   III 

bhadrasocise  0  son  of  strength,  0  projntioushj  bright  one  (both 
addressed  to  Agni).^ 

1).  When  it  does  not  begin  the  sentence  or  Pada,  the 
vocative,  being  unemphatic,  loses  its  accent ;  e.  g.  upa  tva^ 
agne  div6-dive  |  dosavastar^  dhiya  vayam  |  namo 
bharanta  6masi  to  thee,  0  Agni,  day  ty  day,  0  illuminer  of 
darkness,  hringing  homage  with  prayer  we  come ;  a  rajana 
maha  rtasya  gopa '  hither  (come),  0  ye  two  sovereign  guardians 
of  great  order  ;  rt^na  mitra-varunav  |  rtavrdhav  rtasprsa  \ 
through  Law,  0  law-loving,  law-cherishing  3Iitra  and  Varuna;^ 
ydd  indra  brahmanaspate  ^  |  abhidroham  caramasi  | 
if,  0  Indra,  0  Brahmanaspati,  we  commit  an  offence. 

19.  The  verb  is  differently  accented  according  to  the 
natux'e  of  the  sentence. 

A.  The  finite  verb  in  a  principal  sentence  is  unaccented  ; 
e.  g,  agnim  ile  purdhitam  I  praise  Agni  the  domestic  priest. 

This  general  rule  is  subject  to  the  following  restrictions  : 

a.  A  sentence  being  regarded  as  capable  of  having  only 
one  verb,  all  other  verbs  syntactically  connected  with  the 
subject  of  the  first  are  accented  as  beginning  new  sentences  ;  '^ 
e,  g.  t6sam  pahi,  srudhi  havam  drinh  of  them,  hear  our 
call ;  taranir  ij  jayati,  ks6ti,  pusyati  the  energetic  man 
conquers,  rules,  thrives ;  jahi  prajam  nayasva  ca  slay  the 
progeny  and  bring  (it)  hither. 

b.  The  verb  is  accented  if  it  begins  the  sentence  or    if. 


^  Here  the  second  voc.  is  accented  as  in  apposition,  whereas  if  it 
were  used  attributively  it  would  be  unaccented  as  in  h6tar  yavistha 
sukrato  0  youngest  wise  prie<it. 

2  Accented  because  the  first  word  of  the  Pada. 

'  This  might  represent  two  vocatives  addressed  to  the  same  persons; 
their  accented  foim  would  then  be  :  rajana,  md,ha  rtasya  gopa. 

*  Here  the  rule  that  the  whole  of  the  compound  voc.  must  be 
unaccented  overrides  the  rule  tliat  the  first  word  of  the  Pada  must 
be  accented,  i.e.  here  rtavrdhav, 

^  An  example  of  two  independent  unaccented  vocatives. 

•>  A  subject  or  object  coming  between  two  such  verbs  is  generally 
counted  to  the  first. 


ACCENT   IN   THE   SENTENCE  467 

though  not  beginning  the  sentence,  it  coincides  with  the 
beginning  of  a  Pada  ;  e.g.  saye  vavris,  carati  jihvayadan  | 
rerihyate  yuvatim  vispatih  sau  (he  covering  lies  (there) ; 
he  (Agni)  moves  eating  with  his  tongue ;  he  kisses  the  maiden, 
bring  the  lord  of  the  house ;  atha  te  antamanam  |  vidyama 
sumatinam  then  may  we  experience  thy  highest  favours. 

c.  Vocatives  being  treated  as  extraneous  to  a  sentence, 
a  verb  immediately  following  an  initial  one.  becomes  the 
first  word  of  the  sentence  and  is  accordingly  accented  ;  e.  g. 
agne,  jusasva  no  havih  0  Agni,  enjoy  our  sacrifice.  Thus 
the  sentence  indra,  jiva ;  surya,  jiva ;  d^va,  jivata  0  Indra, 
live :  0  Surya,  live ;  0  gods,  live  contains  three  accented 
verbs  as  beginning  three  sentences,  while  the  three  preceding 
vocatives  are  accented  as  bsing  at  the  head  of  those  sen- 
tences, though  syntactically  outside  them. 

d.  Sometimes  the  verb  when  emphatic,  though  not 
beginning  the  sentence,  is  accented  if  followed  by  the 
particles  id  or  cana  ;  e.  g.  adha  sma  no  maghavan  carkr- 
tad  it  then  he  mindful  of  us,  bountiful  one ;  na  deva 
bhasathas  cana  (him)  0  gods,  ye  two  never  consume. 

B.  The  verb  of  a  subordinate  clause  (introduced  by  the 
relative  ya  and  its  derivatives,  or  containing  the  particles 
ca  and  c6d  if;  n6d  lest,  hi  fo7-,  kuvid  whether)  is  always 
accented  ;  e.  g.  yam  yajnam  paribhur  asi  ivhat  offering  thou 
protectest ;  grhan  gacha  grhapatni  yatha^asah  go  to  the 
house  that  thou  mayest  be  the  lady  of  the  house ;  indras  ca 
mrlayati  no,  na  nah  pascad  agham  nasat  if  Indra  he 
gracious  to  us,  no  evil  will  hereafter  reach  us  ;  tvam  hi  balada 
asi  yor  thou  art  a  giver  of  strength.  The  relative  may  govern 
two  verbs  ;  e.g.  y6na  surya  jyotisa  badhase  tamo,  jagac 
ca  visvam  udiyarsi  bhanuna  the  light  with  which  thou, 
0  Sun,  drivest  an-ny  the  darkness  and  arousest  all  the  n-orld 
with  thy  beam. 

The  rule  is  suliject  to  the  extension  that  principal  r-hiuses  in 
form  may  be  accented  as  siibnrdinate  in  sense  under  the  following 
conditions  : 

Hh2 


468  APPENDIX   III 

a.  The  first  of  two  clauses,  if  equivalent  to  one  introduced  by  'if 
or  'when*  is  occasionally  accented  ;  e.g.  s5m  asvaparnas  c&ranti  no 
ndro,  asmakam  indra  rathfno  jayantu  when  our  men  loinged  with  steeds 
come  together,  may  our  car-fighters,  Indra,  win  victory. 

p.  The  first  Of  two  antithetical  clauses  is  frequently  accented, ^ 
especially  when  the  antithesis  is  clearly  indicated  by  corresponding 
words  lilie  anyd-any^,  6ka-6ka,  ca-ca,  va-va  ;  e.  g.  prfi-pra^any6 
ydnti,  pfiiry  anyd  asate  while  some  go  on,  others  sit  doxcn  ;  sd,rp.  ca^idhasva 
agne,  prfi  ca  bodhaya^enam  both  he  kindled,  Agni,  and  waken  this  man's 
knowledge.  When  the  verb  of  two  such  clauses  is  the  same,  it  usually 
appears  (accented)  in  the  first  only  ;  e.  g.  dvipac  ca  s^rvam  no  riksa, 
c^tuspad  yfic  ca  nah  svfim  protect  both  every  biped  of  ours  and  ^ohatever 
quadruped  is  our  own, 

y.  The  verb  of  the  second  clause  is  accented  if  it  is  a  1.  pers. 
subjunctive  or  2.  pers.  imperative^  with  a  final  meaning,  and  the 
verb  of  the  first  clause  is  a  2.  pers.  impv.  of  a  +  i,  gam,  or  ya  170  ;  e.  g. 
6ta,  dhiyain  krndvama  come,  ice  will  offer  prayer  ;  tiayam  a  gahi,  kdnvesu 
sii  sdca  piba  come  quickly,  beside  the  Kanvas  drink  thy  fill.  In  B.  the  verb  of 
the  first  clause  is  an  impv.  of  either  a-i  or  prd-i ;  e.  g.  6hi^iddm 
p&tSLva,  (SB.)  come,  we  xvill  noiofly  thither  ;  pr6ta  tfid  esyamo  ydtra^imSm 
^sura  vibhdijante  come,  we  will  go  thither  where  the  Asuras  are  dividing  this 
earth  (§B.).  The  second  verb  is,  however,  in  similar  passages  not 
infrequently  left  unaccented  in  B. 


Verbal  Prepositions. 

20.  A.  In  principal  clauses  the  preposition,  which  is 
detached  and  usually  precedes  but  sometimes  follows  the 
verb,  is  accented  ;  e.  g.  a  gamat  majf  he  come ;  gavam  apa 
vrajam  vrdhi  unclose  the  stable  of  the  Jcinc,  jayema  sam 
yudhi  sprdhah.  tve  would  conquer  our  adversaries  in  fight ; 
gamad  vajebhir  a  sa  nah  may  he  come  to  us  with  hooty. 

a.  When  there  are  two  prepositions,  both  are  independent 
and  accented  ;  e.  g.  upa  pra  yahi  come  forth ;  pari  spaso  ni 
sedire  the  spies  have  sat  down  around ;  agne  vi  pasya 
brhata  abhi  raya  0  Agni,  look  forth  towards  (us)  with  ample 
wealth. 


1  This  accentuation  is  moi*e  strictly  applied  in  B.  than  in  V.,  and 
among  the  Samhitas  least  strictly  in  tlie  RV. 

-  In  B.  the  accented  verb  is  either  a  subjunctive  or  a  future. 


VERBAL   PEEPOSITIONS  469 

a.  When  a  is  immediately  preceded  by  another  preposition  (not 
ending  in  i)  it  alone  is  accented,  both  prepositions  being  compounded 
with  the  verb  ;  e.  g.  sam-a-krnosi  jivd.se  ihou  fittest  (them)  to  live  ;  but 
prdty  a  tanusva  draw  (thy  bow)  against  (them). 

B.  In  subordinate  clauses  the  exact  reverse  takes  place, 
the  preposition  being  generally  compounded  and  unaccented  ; 
e.  g.  yad  .  .  nisidathah  tvhen  ye  two  sit  doivn.  It  is,  however, 
often  separated  by  other  words  from  the  verb,  when  it 
commonly  commences  the  Pada,  or  much  less  frequently 
follows  the  verb  ;  e.  g.  vi  yo  mame  rajasi  loho  measured  out 
the  two  expanses ;  yds  tastambha  sahasa  vi  jm6  antan  who 
with  might  propped  earth's  ends  asunder.  Occasionally  the 
preposition  is  detached  and  accented  even  immediately  before 
the  verb ;  e.  g.  yd  ahutim  pdri  v6da  ndmobhih  who  fidly 
knows  the  offering  with  devotion. 

a.  When  there  are  two  i^repositions,  either  both  are  com- 
pounded and  unaccented  or  the  first  only  is  detached  and 
accented ;  e.  g.  yuydm  hi  devih  pari-pra-yathd  for  ye, 
0  goddesses,  proceed  around ;  ydtra^abhi  sam-ndvamahe 
where  we  to  (him)  together  shout ;  sdm  ydm  a-ydnti  dhendvah 
to  whom  the  cows  come  together. 

a.  Very  rarely  both  prepositions  are  detached  and  accented  ;  e.  g. 
prd  y6t  stota  .  .  lipa  girbhir  Itte  when  the  praiser  latids  him  tcith  songs. 


I 


VEDIC   INDEX 

This  index  contains  all  Sanskrit  words  and  affixes  occurring  in  the 
grammar,  except  the  verbs  in  Appendix  1,  which  can  be  found  at 
once  owing  to  their  alphabetical  order.  Indifferent  words  occurring 
in  examples  of  Sandhi,  of  nominal  derivation  (Chapter  VI),  or  of 
Syntax,  as  well  as  in  Appendixes  II  and  III,  are  excluded. 

The  figures  refer  to  paragraphs  unless  pages  are  specified. 

ABBREVIATIONS 

A.  =  adjective,  act.,  active,  adv.,  adverb,  adverbial,  ac,  aorist. 
Bv.,  Bahuvrihi.  cd.,  compound,  cj.,  conjunction,  cond.,  conditional, 
conj.,  conjugation,  -al.  corr.,  correlative,  cpv.,  comparative,  cs,, 
causative,  dec,  declension,  dem.,  demonsti-ative.  den.,  denomina- 
tive, der.,  derivative,  derivation,  ds.,  desiderative.  end.,  enclitic. 
Dv.,  Dvandva.  f.n.  foot-note.  It.,  future,  gd.,  gerund,  ij.,  inter- 
jection, indec,  indeclinable.  inf.,  infinitive.  inj.,  injunctive, 
int.,  intensive,  inter.,  interrogative,  ipv.,  imi^erative.  irr.,  irregu- 
larities, itv.,  iterative,  mid.,  middle.  N.,  nominative,  n.,  neuter, 
neg.,  negative,  nm.,  numeral,  nom.,  nominal,  ord.,  ordinal,  par., 
paradigm,  pel.,  particle,  per.,  perijjhrastic.  pf.,  perfect,  ppf.,  plu- 
perfect, poss.,  possessive,  pp.,  past  passive  jjarticiple.  pr.,  present, 
pri.,  primary,  prn.,  pronoun,  pronominal,  prp.,  preposition,  pre- 
positional. 2>rs.,  person,  personal,  jjs.,  passive,  pt.,  participle,  red., 
reduplication,  reduplicated,  ref.,  rellexive.  rel.,  relative,  rt.,  root, 
sb.,  subjunctive.  sec,  secondarj^  sf.,  suffix.  spv.,  superlative, 
synt.,  syntactical.     Tp.,  Tatpurusa.     v.,  vocative,     vb.,  verb,  verbal. 


w 


ith. 


A,  vowel,  pronunciation  of,  15,1a;       a,  pronominal  root,  111  ;  195  B  6  ; 
initial,    dropped,    5  c;    156  a;  accentuation  of,  p.  452,  8  B  c; 


elided,    45,    2  b  ;     lengthened, 


p.  458  /3. 


162, 1  c;  168  6;  171,1;  175  A  1;  [    a-,  augment,  128. 
thematic,  140,6  ;  141 ;  143, 5.  6  ;       a-  or  an-,  privative  pel.,  in   Bv. 

147,  149  ;  change  to  i,  175  A  1  ;  j        cds.,  p.  455,  10  c  a  ;    in  Karma- 
dropped,  175  A  2  ;  to  be  restored  dharayas,  p.  455,  f.n,  2  ;  p.  456, 

after  e  and  o,  p.  4o7,  a  7.  i        10  rf  1  a. 


472 


VEDIC   INDEX 


-a,  sf.  of  1st  conj.,  125  ;  pri.  nom. 

sf. ,    182,    1  b ;    sec.    nom.    sf., 

182,  2  ;  radical  nom.  stems  in, 

97,  3  ;  der.  nom.  stems  in,  97. 
ams,  attain,  pf.,  139,  6  ;  140,  3.  5  ; 

rt.  ao.  inj.,  148,  3,  op.,  148,  4, 

pre,  148,  4  a. 
aktubhis,     inst.    adv.     by    night, 

178,3. 
aktos,  gen.  adv.  bi/  niijht,  178,  0; 

202  D  3  a. 
d,ks,  eye,  80. 
fiksi,  n.  eye,  99,  4. 
akhkhali-kr,  croak,  184  d. 
agrat^s,  adv.  before,  av.  gen.,  202  D. 
dgram,  adv.  before,  1 78,  2. 
agrii,  f.  maid,  100,  II  «. 
figre,  loc.  adv.  in  front,  178,  7. 
dgrena,  adv.  in  front,  178,  3  ;  w. 

ace,  197  c  /3. 
angi,  i^cl.  7i(s?,  180. 
fingiras,  m.  a  proj^er  name,  83, 2  a. 
ficha,  prp.  towards,  w.  ace,  176,  1 ; 

197  B  c. 
&i,  m.  driver,  79,  3  a.  ' 
-aj,  stems  in,  79,  3  b. 
ajavfiyah,  m.  pi.  goats  and  sheep, 

186    A    2 ;      accentuation     of. 

p.  457,  e. 
djosas,  a.  insatiable,  83,  2  a  a. 
-anc,  -ivard,  adjectives  in,  93 ;   ac- 
centuation, p.  459,  c  4. 
anj,    anoint,    pr.,    134  D  1  ;    pf., 

139,  6 ;  140,  1.  3.  5. 
toiyams,  cpv.  of  dnu,  small,  103. 

'2  a.' 
dtatha,  a.  not  saying  '  yes ',  97,  2  a. 
fttas,  adv.  hence,  179,  2. 
Cti,  prp.  beyond.,  w.  ace,  176,  1  ; 

197  B  c. 
atijagati,  f.  a  metre,  p.  441,  f.n.  6. 
atisakvari,  f.  a  metre,  p.  444,  10  «. 
atyasti,  f.  a  metre,  p.  445,  10  6. 
dtra.'adv.    here,   179,   3;    =  then, 

180. 
dtha,  adv.  then,  179,  1  ;  synt.  use 

of,  180. 
Atharvaveda,      liow       accented, 

p.  449. 
4th.o,  adv.  moreover,  synt.  use  of, 

180. 
-ad,  stems  in,  77,  3  b. 


ddant,  pr.  j^t.  eating,  85  (par.), 
adas,   dem.    prn.    that,    112 ;  adv. 

there,  178,  2  a. 
addha,  adv.  truly,  179,  1. 
^drak,  has  seen,  s  ao.  of  drs,  p.  16J , 

f.  n.  1. 
adribhid,  Tp.  cd.  mountain-cleaving. 

77,  3  a. 
adha,  adv.  then,  179.  1  ;  svnt.  use 

of,  180. 
adhas,  adv.  beloa-,  179,  1  ;  prp.,  w. 

ace,  abl.,  gen.,  177,  1.  3. 
adhastat,  adv.  below,  179,  2. 
ddhi,    prp.     upon.    w.    loe,    abl.. 

176,  2. 
ddhvan,  m.  road,  90. 

an,  breathe,  pr.,  134  A  3  «  (p.  143  . 
-an,  pri.  nom.  sf.,  182,  1  b  ;  stems 

in,    90,   1  ;    irr.    stems   in,  91  ; 

influence   of   stems    in,    p.    78, 

f.  n.  15. 
-ana,  pri.  nom.  sf.,  182,  1  b. 
and.ks,  a.  eyeless,  80. 
auadvdli,  m.  o.r,  81  ;  96  ;  96,  2. 
anarvdn,  a.  irresistible,  90,  3. 
an5,  adv.  thus,  178,  3  c. 
-ana,  pri.  nom.  suffix,  182,  1  b. 
anagas,  a.  sinless,  83,  2  a  a. 
-ani,  pri.  nom.  sf..  182,  1  b. 
-aniya,    gdv.    sf.,     162 ;    162,    6 ; 

209,  6. 
anu,   prp.   after,   w.   ace.    176.   1  ; 

197  B  c. 
anudatta,  m.  toic pitch  accent,  p.  448, 

1 ;  how  marked,  p.  449,  2 ;  p.  450, 

3.  4. 
anunasika,  m.  nasal,  10/ ;  15,  2/. 
anustubh,  f.  a  metre,  p.  438,  f.n. 

2  ; "  p.  439,  3  b ;   later  form  of, 

p.  439,  3  b  a. 
anusvara,  m.  p^lre  nasal,  Sf;  10  f 

15,  2/;  29  b;  39;  40  a;  40,  2 

42 ;   p.  33,  f.  n.  1,  2,  6 :   49  6 

66  A  ;  67  ;  for  n,  p.  163,  f.  n.  2 

144,  1. 
-ant,  stems  in,  85  ;  sf.  of  pr.  pt. 

act.,  156. 
antir,  prp.  between,  w.   ace,  abl., 

loe,  176,  2. 
antara,  adv.  prp.  between,  w.  ace. 

177,  1  ;  197  Be. 


VEDIC   INDEX 


473 


antarena,    adv.    prj).    beUceen,   w. 

ace,  197  B  c  /3. 
antastha,     f.    intermediate  =  semi- 

voH-el,  11, 
antika,  a.  near,  cpv.  and  spv.   nf, 

103,  2  b. 
antikam,     adv.     near,     w.    geii., 

202  D. 
anyd,,  prn.  a.  other  (par.),  120  «. 
anyatra,  adA'.  elsewhere,  171),  3. 
auyatha,  adv.  otherwise,  179,  1. 
anyedyus,  adv.  next  day,  179,  1. 
anyo  'nyi,,  a.  one  another,  concord 

of,  p.  290,  2  /3. 
anvinc,  i\.  following,  93  a. 
ap,  f.  water,  78,  1  ;  78,  la;  96,  1. 
apara,  a.  Innr,  120  f  1. 
aparaya,  dat.  adv.  for  the  future, 

178,  4. 
aparisu,   loc.    \)\.    adv.    t/j  future, 

178,'  7. 
apas,  n.  loork,  83,  2  «  (par.), 
apds,  a.  arfu-e,  83,  2  a  (,par.). 
apanc,  a.  backward,  93  &. 
4pi,  prp.  M2^oH,  w.  loc,   176,  lb; 

adv.  also,  even,  180. 
apsards,  f.  nymph,  83,  2  a. 
abhi,  prp.  towards,  w.  ace,  176,  1. 
abhitas,  adv.  around,  179,  2  ;  prp. 

w.  ace,  177,  1  ;  197  B  c. 
abhinihita  svarita,  a  Sandhi  ac- 
cent, p.  465,  f.  n.  2. 
abhisn&th,  a.  piercing,  77,  2. 
ibhiru,  n.  fearless,  98  a. 
am,  injure,  pr.,  134,  3  c;  irr.  I'ed. 

ao.,  149  a  1. 
-am,  gd.  in,  166  ;  210  a  ;  inf.  in. 

211,  2  a. 
ama,  dem.  prn.  this,  112  a  y. 
ama,  adv.  at  home,  p.  110,  f.  n.  1  ; 

178,  3  f. 

amad,    adv.   from    near,    p.    110, 

f.^n.  1. 
ami,  dem.  prn.  those,  N.  pi.  m.,  112. 
amiitas,  adv.  thence,  p.  109,  f.  n.  1  ; 

179,  2. 

amutra,  adv.  there,  p.  109,  f.  n.  1. 
amutha,  adv.  thus,  p.  109,  f.  n.  1. 
amuya,    inst.    adv.    in   that   wa>/, 

178,  3  c. 
amba,  v.  0  mother,  p.  78,  f.  n.  6. 
•  aya,  cs.  sf.,  how  added,  168,  1. 


ayam,    dem.    j>rn.    this   here,    111 

i,par.    ;  195  B  1. 
aya,  adv.  thus,  178,  3  c. 
dyat,  has  sacrificed,    s   no.  of  yaj, 

J).' 161,  f.  n.  1. 
ay  as,  hast  sacrijiced,  2.  s.  s  ao.  of 

yaj,  144,  2. 
ayuta,  nm.  ten  thousand,  104. 
-ar,  stems  in,  101,  1. 
ar,  liigh  grade  of  r,  5  a  ;  low  grade 

of,  4  a. 
aram,  adv.  suitably,  178,  2  a  ;  com- 

l)ounded  w.  verbs,  184  b ;  svnt. 

use,  180  ;  w.  dat.,  200  A  4  a. 
ari,  a.  devout,  p.  81,  f.  n.  1  ;  99,  3. 
drus,  n.  wound,  83,  2  c. 
arc,  praise,  pf.  139,  6  ;  pr.  pt.  85. 
drthaya,  adv.  dat.  for  the  sake  of, 

200  B  5. 
ardh,  thrive,  pf.  139,  6. 
arp5.ya,    cs.    of   r,    go,    red.    ao., 

149  a  3. 
arplta  and  d,rpita,  jjp.  cs.  of  r,  go, 

160,  3. 
^rbuda,  nm.  ten  millions,  104. 
aryaman,  m.,  a  god,  90. 
arvaiic,  a.  kitherward,  93  b. 
arh,  deserve,  pf.,  139,  6. 
d,lam  =  firam,  adv.,  synt.  use  of. 

180. 
alalabhavant,     pr.    pt.    sounding 

merrily,  184  d. 
al,  high  grade  of  vowel  1,  5  a. 
61pa,  a.   small,   cpv.   and  spv.  of, 

103,  2  b. 
a,vi,,  dem.  prn.  this,  112  a  /3. 
^va,  prp.  down,  w.  abl.,  176,  3. 
avagraha,    m.  nuwk  of  separation, 

p.  454,  10  a. 
fivatta,  cut  off:  pp.  of  da,  160,  2  6. 
avani,  f.  stream,  p.  82,  f.  n.  3. 
avama,  spv.  lowest,  120  c  1. 
avayaj,  f.  share  of  oblation,  79,  3  a  a. 
dvara,  cpv,  loiver,  120  c  1. 
^varena,  adv.  prp.  below,  w.  abl,, 

p,  209,  f.  n.  3. 
avd.s,  adv.  downwards ;   prp.  down 
from,  below,  w.  abl.,  177,  3  ;  w. 
inst.,  177,  2. 
avistad,     adv.     below,     w.     gen., 
202  D, 


474 


VEDIC   INDEX 


avaS-C,  a.  doivnward,  93  b, 

avat,  has  shone,  3.  s.  s  ao.  of  vas, 

14i,  2. 
&vi,  m.  sheep,  p.  81,  f.  n.  1. 

1.  as,  reach,  see  anis. 

2.  as  e«^,  pr.  stem,  134  E  i. 
asitavant,  pf.  pt.  haviny  eaten,  161. 
a^iti,  nm.  eighty,  104. 

Ismail,  m.  stone,  90,  1.  2  ( pai'.). 
dsrait,   3.  s.   s   ao.  of  sri,    resort, 

111,  2. 
asvin,   a.   possessing  horses,   p.  04, 

t  11.  4. 
astakfivas,  nm.    adv.  e/t/W  times, 

"108  a. 
astadha,  nm.  adv.  •  j«  eight  ivays, 

'  ios  b. 

astamd,  ord.  eighth,  107. 

asta,  nm.  eight,  104  ;  106  b  (par.;. 

astacatvarimsa,    ord.  forty-eighth, 

'107. 
astadasa,  nm.,  104  ;  106  c  (par.), 
as,*  be,  pr.,  134  A  2  6  ;  pr.  pt.  act., 

156  a. 
-as,  pri.  iioin.  sf.,  182,  1  b  ;  stems 

in,  83,  2a;  p.  453,  9  A  o  ;  adv. 

sf.  w.    loe.    sense,  179,  3  ;   aljl. 

gen.  inf.  in,  163,  3  a  ;  211,  3  a  ; 

changed  to  o,  145,  2  b. 
asakdu,  deni.  prn.  that  little,  117  a. 
asasc^t,  Bv.  cd.  'unequalled,  85  b. 
isikni,  a.  f.  black,  p.  86,  f.  n.  3. 
asikni,  f.  name  of  a  river,  p.  86, 

f.  n.  3. 
Jlsrj,  n.  blood,  79,  3  b. 
asau,  dem.  prn.  that  ^ there,,  112 

(par.) ;  synt.  use,  195  B  2. 
astam,  ace.  adv.  home,  178,  2  ;  w. 

verbs,  184  c. 
astamik^,  loc.  adv.  at  home,  178,  7. 
Astodhvam,   2.   pi.  s   ao.   of  stu, 

praise,  144,  2  a. 
asthi,  n.  bone,  99,  4. 
asma,  prs.  prn.  stem,  109  b. 
asmatra,  adv.  among  us,  179,  3. 
asmdtsakhi,  Bv.  cd.  hacing  us  as 

companions,  109  b. 
asmad,    prs.    prn.   stem    in    cds., 

109  b. 
asmadruh,  Tp.  cd.  hating  us,  109  b. 


asmaka,  poss.  prn.  our,  116  a. 

asmakam,  gen.  pi.  prs.  prn.  of  us, 
116  a. 

dsvapnaj,  sleepless,  79,  3  b. 

ah,  saij,  defective  verb,  pf.,  139,  4. 

dha,  emphasizing  pel.  JMs<,  180. 

dhamsana,  a.  rapacious,  synt.  cd., 
189  Be. 

d,han,  n.  day,  90  ;  91,  2  ;  as  tinal 
member  of  Bv.  cds.,  189,  3  c 

ahdm,  personal  jn-n.,  I,  109. 

ahamuttardi,  n.  dispute  for  prece- 
dence, synt.  cd.,  189  B  c. 

ahampurvd.,  a.  eager  to  be  first,  synt. 
cd.,  189  B  t. 

ahar,  n.  day,  91,  2  ;  101,  1. 

d,harahar,  ecery  day,  itv.  cd. ,  189  C  a . 

dhardivi,  day  after  day,  mixed  itv. 
cd.,  189  C  a,  f.  n.  1 ;  accentua- 
tion, p.  457,  e  a. 

aharpati,  m.  lord  of  day,  49  d. 

ahi.  111.  serpent,  100,  I  a. 

dhait,  3.  s.  s  ao.  of  hi,  144,  2. 

ahoratra,  n.  day  and  night,  186  A  2 ; 
accentuation,  p.  457,  e. 

ahna  =  ahan,  day,  in  cds.,  p.  275, 
f.  n.  3. 

A,  vowel,  dropped,  p.  206,  f.  n.  3  ; 
low  wrade  of,  5  c  ;  reduced  to  i 
or  Cl48.  1/;  160,  2;  169,2; 
to  1,  p.  190,  2  ;  shortened,  19  a, 
f.  n.  5  ;  147  a  1  ;  p.  273,  f.  n.  4  ; 
nasalized,  19  6,  f.  n.  1. 

a,  prp,  OH.,w.  loc,  ace,  abl.,  176,  2  ; 
i-everses  meaning  of  gam,  go, 
and  da,  give,  p.  265,  f.  n.  6. 

a,  emjihasizing  pel.,  ISO. 

-a,  pri.  nom.  sf. ,  182,  1  b ;  stems 
in,  97,  2  ;  sec.  nom.  sf.,  182,  2  ; 
stems  in,  97  ;  for  a  in  sb., 
134  A  4  c  ;3  ;  du.  ending,  p.  78,' 
f.  n.  13  ;  p.  81,  f.  n.  1,  2  ;  pi.  n. 
ending,  p.  78,  f.  n.  14. 

ake,  loc.  adv.  near,  178,  7. 

atmdn,  m.  self,  115  b  a. 

ad,  adv.  tlien,  178,  5;  synt.  use, 
ISO. 

adhi,  f.  care,  100  C  a,  L  n.  \. 

an-,  pf.  red.,  139,  6 ;   shortened, 
1        140,  1. 


VEDIC  INDEX 


475 


-ana,  sf.  of  mid.  pt.,  pr.  158  a,  pf. 

159. 
-ana,  sf.    of  2.   s.   ipv.  act.,  125, 

f.  n.  9  ;  134  E  4. 
anajanfi,    pf.    pL    mid.,    of    anj, 

anoint,  159. 
anai§an^,    pf.    pt.    mid.,    of  ams, 

reach,  159. 
ar;),  secondary  nom.  sf.,  182,  2. 
apfk,  adv.  in  a  mixed  way,  79,  1 . 
abhu,  a.  present,  100,  II  6. 
-ayana,  secondary  nom.  sf,,  182, 2. 
ayu,  n.  life,  98  a  (p.  S3;. 
-ayya,gdv.  sf.,  162;  162,  2;  209,  3. 
arat,  abl.  adv.  from  afar,  178,  5. 
arattat,  adv.  from  afar,  179,  2. 
ar§,  loc.  adv.  afar,  178,  7  ;  prp.  w. 

abl,  or  gen.,  177,  3;  202  D  a. 
arya,  f.  a  metre,  p.  436,  f.  n.  2. 
avfim,   prs.    prn.   K.    du.,    we  tico, 

109. 
avayaj,    m.    ^Jj'icsi    who    offers   the 

oblation,  79,  3  a  a. 
avis,  adv.  openbj,  \v.  verbs,  184  b  ; 

\v.  dat.,  200  A  4  b. 
asistha,  spv.  swiftest,  103,  2  P. 
Mis,  f.  xiraijer,  83,  2  b  a. 
as'a,  a.  sivlft,  spv.  of.,  103,  2  ^. 
asuya,  inst.  aJv.  swiftly,  178,  3  h. 
as,  n./Kce,  83,  1. 
asat,  abl.  adv.  ./Vo»j  near,  178,  5. 
asand,    pr.    pt.    mid.,    of   as,    sit, 

158  a. 
asina,  irr.  pr,  pt.  mid.,  of  as,  sit, 

158  a. 
asmakd,  poss.    prn,    our,   p.   113, 

f.  n.  2. 

I,  vowel,  low  grade  of  e  and  ya, 

4  a  ;  5  a,  fc. 
i,   go,   134,   lea;    pr.   system   of 

(par.),  132  (pp.  130-1;  ;  red.  pf. 

pt.,  157  a. 
-i,  pri.  num.   sf.,   182,  1  h ;   sec. 

nom.  sf.,  182,  2  ;  stems  in,  98. 
-i-,  connecting  vowel,  89  a  ;  145. 
-ij,  stems  in,  79,  3  b, 
id,  f.  refreshment,  80. 
-it,  stems  in,  77,  1. 
-ita,  pp.  sf.,  160,  3  ;  always  taken 

by  see.  verbs,  iUid, 


itara,  prn.  a,  other,  117  6;  120,  a. 

it^s,  adv.//om  here,  179,  2. 

iti,  pel.  thus,   syrit.  use  of,  180  ; 

196  a  /3  ;  use  in  Pada  text,  p.  25, 

f.  n.  2 ;  p.  26,  f,  n.  1,  5. 
itthdm,  adv.  thus,  179,  1  a. 
ittha,  adv.  so,  179,  1  ;  svnt.  use. 

180. 
id,  emphasizing  pel.,  180 ;  accents 

verb,  p.  467,  19  A  d. 
iddm,  dem.  prn.  this,  111  ;  as  adv., 

178,  2  a. 
ida,   adv.    non-,   179,  3 ;    w.  gen., 

p2. 
idanlm,    adv.    now,    179,  3  )3  ;   w. 

gen.,  202  D  2. 
idh,  kindle,  rt.  ao.  op.,  148,  4  ;  pt. 

148,  6. 
-idhe,  inf.  to  kindle,  167  a  (p.  191;. 
-in,  sec.  nom.  sf.,  182,  2 ;  stems  in, 

87  ;  accentuation  of,  p.  454,  B  a. 
indra-vayii,    du.    cd.,  Ijidra   and 

Vdyu,  186  A  1  ;    accentuation, 

p.  457,  f.  n.  2. 
inv,   send,    pr.   stem,    133  A  2  6  ; 

134  CA&. 
ima,  dem.  prn.  stem,  this,  111. 
imfitha,  adv.  in  this  manner,  179,  1. 
-iya,  secondary  nom.  sf.,  182,  2. 
iyant,    quantitative    a.   so    much, 

118  h   par.  . 
iy^m,  f.  dem.  prn.  this.  111. 
-Iran,  3,  pi.  mid.  ending  of  ppf. . 

140,  6. 
iva,  end.  pel.  as  if,  like,   179,   1  ; 

180  ;  p.  452,  8  A  b. 
is,  wish,  pr.  stem,  133  C  2  ;  pr.  pi., 
"85. 
is,  f.  refreshment,  80. 
-is,  ao.  suffix,  142  ;  145. 
isu,  f.  arrow,  98  a  (p.  82  > 
istapurtam,  n.   Dv.  cd.   what  has 

been  offered  and  given,    186  A  3; 

accentuation,  457,  e. 
-istha,    pri.    spv.    suffix.    103,    2; 

p.  453,  9  A  6. 
-is,  pri.  num.  sf.,  182,  1  b  ;  sterna 

in,  S3,  2  6. 
iM,  adv.  here,  179,  1. 

I,  vowel,  often  chang«d  to  iy  in 


476 


VEDIC   INDEX 


Sandhi,  57  ;   low  grade  of  ya, 

5  6a;  ending  of  du.  and  of  ami, 

unconti'acted  in  Sandhi,  25  a, 

b,  c  ;  inserted  in  int.  red.,  172  a ; 

173,  3;   sec.   nom.   sf.,  182,  2; 

stems  in,  95  ;  100  h  ;  connecting 

vowel,  144,  2  (s  ao.)  ;  145  b  (is 

ao.)  ;    160,    3  a   (pp.)  ;    162,    4 
^   (gdv.). 
id,  f.  praise,  80. 
id,  praise,  pr.  stem,  134  A  3  b. 
idfksa,  prn.  cd.  such,  117. 
idfs,  jn-n.  cd.  sucJi,  117. 
idrsa,  prn.  cd.,  117,  f.  n.  4. 
-ina,  secondary  nom.  suflSx,  182,  2. 
im,    end.    pronominal    jDarticle, 

180  ;  p.  452,  8  A  a. 
-im,    ending    of    1.    s.    is    aorist, 

145  c. 
-iya,  secondary  nom.  suffix,  182,  2. 
-iyams,  pri.  ci)v.    suffix,   103,    2 ; 

p.  453,  9  Ac. 
iyivams,  pf.  pt.  act.  of  i,  go,  89  a. 
ivant,   prn.    derivative,   so   great, 

118  c, 
is,    rule,    pr.    stem,    134  A  3  b ; 

134  A4ca. 
IS,  m.  lord,  79,  4. 
isvard,  a.  able,  concord  of,  194  B  2  a ; 

w.  inf.,  216  (p.  365  (3)  :  av.  gen. 

inf,   211,  3  aa;    211,  3  &  a  ;    w. 

yad  and  op.,  216  (p.  364  0). 

U,  vowel,  low  grade  of  o  and  va, 

o  a,  b. 
u,  end.  pel.  noiv,  pray,  180  ;   form 

of,  in  Pada  text,  p.  25,  f.  ii.  2  ; 

p.  452,  8  A  &. 
-u,  stems  in,  98. 
uks&n,  m.  ox,  90,  1  (p.  68). 
uc,  be  pleased,  red.  pf.  pt.,  157  a. 
ucca,  adv.  on  high,  178,  3  6. 
uccd.is,  adv.  on  high,  178,  3  b. 
-ut,  stems  in,  77,  1 . 
ut£,  cj.  and,  180. 
uto,  cj.  and  also,  synt.  use,  180. 
uttami,  spv.  highest,  103,  1  c. 
Tittara,  cpv.  higher,  103, 1  c  ;  120  c  1 

(par.). 
uttarat,  abl.   adv.  from  the  north, 

178,  5. 
littarena,    adv.   prp.    7iorth   of,   w. 


ace,  177,  1,  f.  n.  3;  197  B  c  fi  ; 

p.  209,  f.  n.  3. 
lid,  f.  trave,  77,  3  a. 
-ud,  stems  in,  77,  3  b. 
lidanc,  a.  upioard,  93  a  ;  northward 

of,  w.  gen.,  202  D  )3. 
udatta,  m.  rising  accent,  p.  448,  1  ; 

p.  451,  6  ;  how  marked,  p.  449, 

2  ;  p.  450,  3.  4.  5. 
-una,  pri.  nom.  suffix,  182,  1  b. 
upa,  pr}).  to,  w.  ace,  176  6  ;  upon, 

w.  loc,  ibid. 
upadhmaniya,  laMal  breathing,  3  g  : 

14  ;  15  ;  43,  2. 
upamS,  spv.  highest,  120  c  1. 
lipara,  cpv.  loiver,  120  c  1. 
updri,  pip.  above,  w.  ace,  177,  1  ; 

197  Be. 
uparistad,   adv.    behind,   w.   gen., 

202"  b. 
upandh,  f.  shoe,  81,  f.  n.  1. 
vxbhaya,  a,  of  both  kinds,   120  c  3 

(par.), 
ubhaydtas,  adv.   on   both  sides  of, 

w.  ace,  197  B  c  0. 
ubhayadyus,   adv.    on    both    days, 

179,^1. 
ubhaya,  inst.   adv.   iii  both  ways, 

178,  3  c. 
-ur,  ending  of  gen.  s.,  99,  1.2; 

101;  of3.pI.act.:  impf.  134A4c; 

p.  125,  f.  n.  7;  pf.,  186;  ppf., 

140,  6  ;  s  ao.,  143,  1  ;  root  ao., 

148,  1. 
uru,  a.  wide,  98  c  ;  cpv.  of,  108,  2a. 
uruvyd,nc,  a.  far-exteiiding,  p.  54. 

f.  n^  1. 
urviya,  inst.  adv. /ar,  178,  3  b. 
urvi,  f.  earth,  du,  of,  p.  81,  f.  n.  14. 
usina,  m.  a  name,  97,  2  a. 
usij,  a.  desiring,  79,  3  6  (par.). 
lis,  f.  dawn,  80. 
usd.s,  f.  dawn,  83,  2  a. 
usasa,  f.  elliptical  du.,  dawn  and 

night,  193,  2  a. 
ustranam,  gen.  pi.  without  cere- 
bral n,  p.  43,  f.  n.  1. 
usnih,  f.  a  metre,  81 ;  p.  444,  1  ; 

■p.  476,  11  A, 
-us,  pri.  nom.  sf.,  182,  1  6  ;  stems 

in,  83,  2  c. 
usf,  f.  dawn,  101,  1. 


VEDIC   INDEX 


477 


©,  vowel  often  changed  to  uv  in 
Sandhi,  57 ;  shortened  to  u, 
p.  274,  f.n.  1  ;  pii.  nom.  sf., 
182,  1  6  ;  stems  in,  100  (pp.  88- 
90). 

iidhd.,  pp.  of  vah,  carri/,  160,  2. 

iiii,  inst.  of  uti,  f.  aid,  p.  81,  f.  n.  4. 

udhan,  n.  ndder,  91,  G. 

iadhar,  n.  xdder,  91,  6  ;  101,  1. 

drj,  f.  vigour,  79,  3  a. 

iirnamradas,  cd.,  fioft  as  wool,  83, 2  a. 

tirdhvdtha,  adv.  iqiwards,  179,  1. 

dh,  consider,  pr.  stem,  13.3  A  1. 

uh,  remove,  133  A  1,  f.  n.  2. 

R,  vowel,  low  grade  of  ar  and  ra, 
'  5  a,  6 ;  before  y  becomes  ri,  58 ; 

stems  in,  101. 
r,  go,  pr.,  133  0  2  ;  134  B  3  a  ;   a 

ao.,   147  c  ;  148,  1  g ;   root  ao. 

inj.,  148,  3  ;  root  ao.  op.,  148,  4  ; 

root  ao.  pt.,  148,  6. 
rgmin,  a.  praising,  87. 
fc,  f.  stanza,  79  :  1,  p.  437. 
rjisvan,  m.  a  name,  90  a. 
rnv,  send,  pr.,  134  C  4  &. 
rtaya,  inst.  adv.  in  fhe  right  waij, 

178,  3  a. 
rtascati,   m.  lord   of  pious   loorks, 

p." 273,  f.  n.  3. 
rt^van,  a.    regular.    90,  3  ;    v.    in 

-vas,  ibid. 
rtutha,  adv.  regidarly,  179,  1. 
rtus&s,  adv.  season  by  season,  179,  1 . 
rt§,  adv.  prp.  without,  178,  7  ;  w. 

abl.,  177,  3  ;  w.  ace,  197  B  r  a 

,p.  303). 
rtvij,  m.  priest,  79,  3,  f.  n.  4. 
rdh,  thrive,   root   ao.  op.,    148,  4  ; 
■    pt.,  148,  6. 
rbhuksd,n,  m.   chief  of  the  Rbhus, 

90,  1  (p.  68). 

R  before  y  becomes  ir  or  ur. 

L,   vowel,   low  grade   of  al,  4  a 

'  (P-  4). 

E,  diphthong,  originally  ai,  p.  22, 
f.  n.  3  ;  high  grade  of  i,  5  a ; 
Sandhi  of  final,  21  ;  internal 
Sandhi   of,    59 ;    unchangeable 


as  du.  ending,  26  ;  for  az,  4  b ; 
134  A  2  /, ;  p.  149,  f.  n.  2  ;  for  a 
in  s  ao.,  143,  3 ;  shortened  before 
a,  p.  437,  a  4. 
6ka,  nm.  o???,  104  ;  105,  1  (,par.)  ; 

120  b. 
ekadha,  adv.  singly,  179,  1  a. 
ekapada  verse,  p.  441.  f.  n.  0. 
ekavirnsd,  ord.  twenty-first,  107. 
ekasasthd,  ord.  sixty-first,  107. 
ekadasa,   nm.   eleven,  104 ;    106  c 

(par.). 
ekadasd.,  ord.  eleventh,  107. 
6kau    na    vimsati.   nm.  nineteen, 

104  a  /3. 
6kaika,  nm.  cd.  one  by  one,  p.  282, 

f.  n.  4. 
etd,  dem.  prn.  tltis,  101  a  1  (par.) ; 
correlative  use,  195  B  4  a ;  =  well 
known,    ibid.  ;     anaphoric     use, 
195  B  4  &  ;  w.  following  ydd  = 
that  is  to  say,  195  B  4  a. 
etadfksa,  prn.  cd.  such,  117. 
etadrs,  prn.  cd.  such,  117. 
etavant,  prn.  derivative,  so  great, 

1 18  c. 
ed,  ij.  lo !  with  ace,  197  B  c  y. 
ena,  end.  prn.,  he,  she,  it,  112  a 

(par.);  p.  452,  8  A  a. 
ena,  inst.  adv.  in  this  way,  178,  3. 
-enya,  gdv.  suffix,  162,  3 ;  209,  4. 
-eya,  secondary  nom.  sf.,  182,  2. 
evd,  adv.  thus,  just,  179,  1  :  synt. 

use,  180. 
evatha,  adv.  jwsf  as,  179,  1. 
evam,  adv.  thus,  179,  1 ;  synt.  use, 

180. 
eva-yavas,  voc.  going  quickly,  90,  8. 
esa,  dem.  prn.  this,  Sandhi  of,  48  ; 
'llOrt  1  ;  195,  4  a. 

O,  diphthong,  originally  au,  p.  22, 
f.  n.  3  ;  high  grade  of  u,  4  b ;  low 
grade  of,  4  a  ;  internal  Sandhi 
of,  59 ;  for  az,  15,  2  k  a  ;  p.  47, 
f.  n.  3  ;  for  aizh,  p.  47,  f.  n.  3 ; 
4  b  ;  stem  in,  102,  2  ;  shortened 
before  a,  p.  437  a  4. 

okivaras,  pf.  pt.  act.  of  uc,  89  a. 

6tave,  dat.  inf.  to  weave,  167  b  4. 


478 


VEDTC   INDEX 


osam,  adv.  quickly,  103,  2  a. 
osistha,  spv.  re?-?/  quick,  103,  2  a. 
ohanfi,  pr.  pt.  of  uh,  consider,  158  a. 

AI,  diphthong,  low  grade  of,  5  d; 
Sandhi  of  final,  22  ;  internal 
Sandhi  of,  59  ;  stem  in,  102. 

-ais,  inst.  pi.  ending,  p.  78,  f.  n.  9. 

ATI,  diphthong,  low  grade  of,  5  d  ; 

Sandhi    of  final,    22 ;   internal 

Sandhi  of,  59;  stem  in,  102. 
-au,   ending   of  1.    3.  s.  pf.  act., 

136,  4  ;   of  N.   A.    du.,   p.   59, 

f.  n.  2  ;  p.  78,  f.  n.  13. 

K,  insertion  of  transitional,  35. 

ka,  intei'.  prn.  who?  113. 

-ka,  pri.  nom.  sf.,  182,  1  b  ;  sec. 

nom.  sf.,  182,  2. 
kakiid,  f.  summit,  77,  3  b. 
kakubh,  f.  peak,  78,  2 ;    a  metre, 

p.  444,  3. 
katamd,,  inter,    prn.  a.   icho?   (of 

many),  IM  b  ;  120  «. 
katar^,  prn.   a.  icMch  (of  two)  ?, 

117  6;  120  rt. 
k£ti,  nm.  du.  hoiv  many?  113  a; 

US  a. 
katidha,    inter,    adv.    hoio    many 

times?  179,  1. 
katpay^,  a.  greatly  swelling,  113  a. 
kathdm,  inter,  adv.  hoic?  179,  1  a. 
kdtha,  inter,  adv.  hon-  ?  p.  354.  2  a  ; 

21(),  2  a. 
kd.d,  inter,  prn.  what?  113. 
kddartha,  a.  having  what  purpose? 

113  a. 
kada,   inter,   adv.   wlien?   179,  3; 

p.  354,  2  a  ;  216,  2  «. 
kadru,  f.  Soma  vessel,  p.  89,  f.  n.  3. 
kdnistha,  spv.  smallest,  103,  2  J>. 
kanisthd,     spv.    yoxtngest,    p.    95. 

f.  n!  3. 
kd,niyams,    cpv.    lesser,    103,  2  a  ; 

yoviiger,  88. 
kanya,  f.  girl,  p.  96,  f.  n.  3. 
kdprth,  n.  penis,  77,  2. 
kam,  adv.  tvell,  synt.  use,  180. 
kara,  pel.  used  after  nti,  su,  hi, 

180  ;  p.  453,  8  B  d. 


k£ya,  inter,  prn.  who?  113  b. 
kaya,  inst.  adv.  how?  178,  3  c. 
kirna,   ear,   compounded  w. 

184  c. 
karmadharaya,   poss.    cds.,    188  ; 

]89f?;  accentuation  of,  p.  455, 

10  rf  1. 
k^rman,  n.  work,  90,  2  (p.  69). 
kasipu,  m.  n.  mat,  98  a. 
k&s   ca,   indefinite  prn.   any   one, 

119  b. 
kfis  cana,  indef.  prn.  any,  119  h. 
kds  aid,  indef.  prn.  any,  119  b. 
kakud,  f.  2'>alate,  77,  3  b. 
kakubha  pragatha,  m.  a  kind  of 

mixed  strophe,  p.  446,  11  B  1. 
Kathaka    Samhita,   accentuation 

of.  p,  450,  3'. 
karaam,  adv.  at  will,  197  A  5  a. 
kamaya,  adv.  dat.  for  the  sake  of, 

200  B  5. 
kas,  f.  cough,  83,  1. 
ki,  inter,  prn.  stem  in  eds.,  113  a. 
kikkita,  ij.,  181. 
kikkira,    ij.,    181  ;   w.  kr,   tear   to 

tatters,  184  d. 
kimkard,  m.  servant,  113  a. 
kimtv£,    synt.    cd.    asking  garru- 

I'oushj,  189  B  c. 
kim,  inter,  prn.  nhat?  113  ;  inter. 

pel.  irhy?  178,  2  a;  180. 
kiyant,  prn.  der.  hon-  great?  113  a  ; 

118  b. 
kila,  adv.  indeed,  synt.  use,  180. 
kicTrs,  prn.  cd.  u-hat  like?  117. 
kivant,  prn.  cd.  how  far?  118  c. 
ku,    inter,    stem    in    derivatives, 

113  ffl. 
kumari,  f.  girl,  100,  lb  a  (p.  88). 
kuvitsa,      some    one,     synt.     cd., 

189  B  c. 
kuvid,  inter,  pel.,  180 ;  p.  354,  2  a  ; 

216,  2  a  :   accents  verb,  p.  467, 

19  B. 
kiiba,  inter,   adv.   ivhere?    113  a; 

179,  1. 
kr,    make,    127,  4  a  ;    pr.   system, 

132  (par.^' ;  anomalous  pr.  stem, 

134  C  4  ;  pr.  pt.,  85  ;  pf.,  S8,  2  : 

pf.  pt.,  157  ;  89,  1  (par.)  ;  a  ao.. 

transfers,     147  a  2;    root    ao., 

148,  1  6 (par.);  op.,  148.  4  ;  inj., 


VEDIC  INDEX 


479 


148,  3  ;    pt.,  148,  6  ;    sb.,  148,  2 

(par.)  ;    impv.,  148,  5  ;    ps.  ao., 

155;    ft.,    151   6  (par.)  ;    It.   pt., 

85;  151  b  2;  pre,  148,  4  a. 
kf-t,  a.  muldng,  11,  1. 
krt,  cut,  pr.,  133  C  1  ;  ft.,  151  a. 
kftvas,  nm.  adv.  limes,  108  «. 
kfp,  f.  hemity,  78,  1. 
krp,  lament,  pr.  stem,  133  A  1. 
krs,  drag,  red.  ao.,  149,  1. 
\i',  s(alter.  pr.,  133  C  3. 
kip,  be  adapled,  red.  ao.,  149,  1. 
k^vala,  a.  exdnsire,  120  c  3. 
krand,  cry  out,  pf.,  137,  2  rf  ;  a  ao., 

147  6;    red.   ao.,   149,   1;    s  ao., 

144,  5. 
kram,  stride,  pr.  stem,  133  A  1  ; 

root  ao.,   148,  1  d  ;  inj.,  148,  3  ; 

is  ao.,  145,  1  (par.). 
krunc,  m.  curlev;  79,  1. 
krudh,  he  angry,  red.  ao.  inj.,  149,  3. 
krus,  cry  out,  sa  ao.,  141  a. 
ks4p,  f.  night,  78,  1  ;  gen.  adv.  of 

'a  night,  202  D  3  a. 
ks£m,  f.  earth.  78,  3 ;  accentuation 

of,  p.  458,  c  1. 
ksar,  ./7o?{j,  s  ao.,  144,  5. 
ksd,  f.  abode,  97,  2. 
ksip,  throw,  red.  ao.  inj.,  149,  3. 
ksip,  f.  finger,  78,  1. 
ksudh,  f.  hunger,  11,  4. 
ksubh,  i.xjush,  78,  2. 
ksaipra,  a.  quickly  pronounced  Sva- 

rita  accent  in  Sandlii,  p.  465, 

f.  n.  1. 
ksnu,  ichet,  pr.  stem,  134,  1  «. 

Kh4,  n.  aperture,  97,  3. 

khan,  dig,  pf.,  137,  2  &  ;  ps.  stem, 

154  d. 
khAlu,    emphasizing   pel.,  indeed, 

180. 
kha,  tweV,  97,  2. 
khidvams,  oppressing,  157  b. 
khya,  see,  a  ao.,  147  a  1. 

Gam,  go,  pr.  stem,  133  A  2  ;  pf., 
137,  2  b  ;  138,  7  ;  140,  3  ;  pf.  pt., 
157;  per.  pf.,  139,9  a;  a  ao., 
147  a  2  (transfers) ;  s  ao.,  144,  3 ; 
rt.    ao.,   148,   1   a:    op.,    148,  4, 


pre.  148,  4  a,  impv.  143,  5,  pt. 
148,  6  ;  ao.  ps.,  155  ;  gd.,  165  a. 

gd,m,  f.  earth,  78,  3. 

gamddhye,  dat.  inf.  to  go,  167  6  7  a. 

ga,  sing,  si.s  aorist,  146. 

gathin,  m.  singer,  87. 

gayatri  stanzn,  p.  438,  3  a;  tro- 
chaic, p.  439,  3  a  a. 

gir,  f.  praise,  82,  f.  n.  5  ;  a.  praising^ 
82,  f.  n.  6. 

giaggulu,  n.  bdellium,  98  b. 

guna,  high  grade  (of  vowels),  5  a ; 
5  a  a;  17;  17  ri;  19  «  ;  21;  in 
dec,  98;  in  conj.,  125,  1.  2  ; 
127,  1.  2;  pr.  stem,  133  A  1  ; 
134,1c;  134,  lea;  pr.pt. mid., 
158  a  ;  a  ao.,  p.  167,  f.  n.  3  ;  a 
ao.,  147  c;  148,  1  g;  red.  ao., 
149 ;  s  ao.,  143,  1.  2.  3  ;  is  ao., 
145,  1  ;  ps.  ao.,  1,55  :  ft.,  151  a; 
gdv.,  162,  1  b,  c;  cs.,  168,  1  ; 
168,  1  c. 

guh,  hide,  pr.  stem,  133  A  1  ;  sa 
ao.,  141  a. 

guh,  f.  hiding-place,  81. 

giidh^,  pp.  of  guh,  hide,  160,  2. 

gr,  n-aken,  red.  ao.,  149,  1 ;  149  a  1 ; 
ipv.,  149,  5. 

gfbh,  f.  seizure,  78,  2. 

gf,  swallow,  pr.  stem,  133  C  3  ; 
red.  ao..  149,  1. 

go,  m.  hidl,  f.  cow,  102;  102,  2 
(par.) ;  accentuation  of,  p.  458  c  1. 

go -m ant,  a.  possessing  cows,  86. 

go-sSn,  a.  winning  cows,  11,  5. 

gdha,  rt.  ao.  of  ghas,  148,  1  g. 

-gdha,  pp.  of  ghas,  eat,  160,  2  a. 

gna,  f.  divine  ivoman,  97,  2. 

grabh,  seise,  is  ao.,  145  b  ;  pr, 
system,  132  (par.)  ;  pr.  stem, 
134  K  2;  pf.,  137,  2  c;  cs.,  168, 
irr   5. 

grabh6,  dat.  inf.  to  seize,  167  a 
(p.  191). 

grah,  seize,  pr.  stem,  134  E  2,  4  ; 
pf.,  137,  2  c ;  ps.,  154,  6. 

giavan,  m.  pressing  stone,  90,  1.  3. 

gldu,  m.  f.  lump,  102  ;  102,  5. 

Gha,  emphasizing  end.  pel.,  180  ; 
p.  452,  8  A  6. 


480 


VEDIC   INDEX 


ghdnighnat,  pr.  pt.  int.  of  han, 

kill,  85  b. 
ghas,  eat,   pf.,   137,  2  6  ;    pf.  pt., 

157  o ;    rt.  ao.,  148,  Id;    des., 

171,  5. 
ghrtdvant,  a.  having  ghee,  86  (p.  64, 

f.  n.  3). 
ghnint,  pr.  pt.  of  han,  kill,  85. 
ghra,  smell,  pr.  stem,  134  B  3  ;3. 

Ca,  c].  and,  syntactical  use,  180  ; 

if.  w.  sb.,  p.  360  5  ;  p.  452,  8  A  b  : 

467,^19  B. 
cakrvams,  pf.  pt.,  having  done,  89 

(par.)", 
eakri,    f.    wheel,    100  I  a   (p.   86, 

f.  n.  1). 
c&ksus,  n.  eije,  83,  2  ;  83,  2  c  ;  a. 

seeing,  83,  2  c. 
catur,  nm./0M»-,  104;  105,  4  (par.  . 
caturtM,  ord.foiirth,  107. 
c&turdasa,  Tim.  fourteen,  104 ;  106  c 

(par-)-, 
caturdha,  adv.  in  four  ways,  108  b. 
cdturvaya,  nm.  der.  fourfold,  108  c. 
catiis,  nm.  adv.  four  times,  108  a, 
catustrimsd,  ord.  thirty-fourth,  107. 
catvarimsa,  ord.  fortieth,  107. 
catvarims^t,  nn\.  forty,  104. 
cand,  pel.  «of  euen,  synt.  nse,  180  ; 

accents  verb,  p.  467,  19  A  d. 
caru,  a.  dear,  98  a,  c. 

1.  ci,  gather,  pf.,  139,  4. 

2.  ci,  note,  pf.,  139,  4. 

cit,  perceive,  pr.  stem,  134  A  4  c  a  ; 

pf.  pt.,  157  6  a  ;  rt.  ao.,  148.  1  d  ; 

s  ao.,  144,  5. 
cit,  f.  thought,  77,  1. 
cid,    pel.   even,    synt.    use,    180 ; 

p.  452,  S  Ab. 
cisca,  ij.  whiz!  181. 
c6d,  cj.  if,  synt.  use,  180  ;  w.  op., 

p.  366,  5  ;  p.  467,  19  B. 
cyu,    stir,    pf.,   139,  8  ;    red.    ao., 

149,  1  :  inj.,  149,  3  ;  op.,  149,  4. 

Ch,  doubling  of,  51  ;  produces 
length  by  position,  p.  437,  a  3. 

-cha,  pr.  stem  sf.,  133  A  2 ;  133  C  2. 

chand,  seem,  s  ao.,  144,  5. 

chdndas,  n.  metre,  p.  436.  f.  n.  1. 

chid,  split,  pf.  pt.,  157  a  ;  rt.  ao. 
inj.,  148,  3. 


J  before  conj.  s,  63  (p.  41,  f.  n.  3). 
jdgat,  a.  going  ;  n.  inanimate  world, 

85  6. 
jagati,  f.  a  metre,  p.  442,  7. 
jaganvams,  pf.  pt.act.  of  gam,  89  a. 
jagmivams,  pf.   pt.   act.  of  gam, 

go,  89  a. 
jajnivams,  pf.  pt.  of  jiia,  89  a. 
jan,  beget,  pr.  stem,  134  A  3  6  ;  pf., 

137,  2  b ;  red.  ao.,  149,  1  (par.) ; 

pr.  stem,  154  d;  ps.  ao.,  155  a  1 ; 

OS.  pt, ,  85. 
janayitr,  a.  creative,  101,  2  b. 
j&ni,  f.  wife,  99,  1  a. 
jdnitri,  f.  mother,  101,  2  c. 
janiis,  n.  birth,  83,  2  c. 
jdm,  f.  earth,  78,  3. 
jamat,  palatalized  ao.  pt.  of  gam, 

go,  189  A  2  «  (p.  280,  f.  n.  4). 
jar^s,  m.  old  age,  83,  2  a  a. 
jdvistha,  spv.  quickest,  103,  2. 
jdviyams,  cpv.  quicker,  103,  2. 
jahf,  2.  s.  pr.  ipv.  of  han,  strike, 

134  A  2c;  p.  41,  f.  n.  1. 
ja,  m.  f.  child,  97,  2. 
janu,  n.  knee,  du.  of,  p.  81,  f,  n.  14, 

15. 
japaya,  cs.  of  ji,  conquer  :  red.  ao., 

149  a  3. 
jaraya,  den.  play  the  lover,  ps.  ao., 

155  a  2. 
ji,    conquer,    pf.,    139,    4 ;    pf.    pt., 

157  b  a  ;   rt.    ao.    inj.,    148,  3; 

s   ao.,  144,  5;    ft.,   151  a;    cs., 

p.  196,  f.  n.  1. 
jit,  a.  conquering,  11,  1. 
jinv,  quicken,  pr.  stem,  133  A  3  6  ; 

134  C  4  j3. 
jihvamiiliya,  guttural  spirant,  3  g ; 

14;  15  j;  43,2. 
ji,  overpouxr,  pr.  stem,  134  E  1. 
jivatave,  dat.  inf.  to  live,  167  b  4. 
juhii,  f.  tongue,  100,  II  a  ;  sacrificial 

spoon,  ibid. 
jxi,  hasten,  pr.  stem,  134  E  1. 
jia,  a.  speeding,  100,  II  «. 
jr,  waste  away,  pr.  stem,  133  B  2. 
jeman,  a.  victorious,  90,  2. 
jogu,  a.  singing  aloud,  100,  II  a. 
jnaptfi,  pp.  cs.  of  ink,  know,  p.  185, 

f.  n.  3. 
jna,  know,  pr.  stem,  134  E  3  ;  pr. 


VEDIC   INDEX 


481 


pi.,  So  ;  it.  ao.  up.,    14y,  i  ;  sis 

au.,  IJrG. 
.jnapaya, ca. ofjuar'ied.iio.,  ii'Ja'o. 
jdas,  HI.  relative,  83,  1. 
jya,  f.  bowstrbuj,  \)1,  2. 
.iyayams,  cpv.  rjreuicr,  88  ;  108,  2  <(. 
jyestha,   spy.   (jreuiest,    103,   2  ;    as 

linal  member  of  Bv.  cd.,  189,  1  b. 
jyesthd,  spv.  eldest,  103,  2. 
jyotis,  n.  Uijht,  83,  2. 

T,  interposed  iji  Sandlii,  3(5  a  ; 
4i»,  1  ;  in  gdv.,  162,  1  d;  deter- 
minative sf.,  77,  1  ;  182,  1  a  ; 
187  A  a  (in  cds.)  ;  stems  in 
secondary,  77,  1. 

ta,  dem.  j^rn.  that,  110  (par.)  ;  in 
syntax  :  position  of,  101  j  ;  as 
corr.,  19.5  B  3  ;  w.  prs.  prns., 
195  B  3  6  a  ;  w.  dem.  prng., 
19.5  B  3  6  )3. 

-ta,  pri.  nom.  sf.,  182,  lb;  sf.  of 
pp.,  160. 

tams,  shake,  pf.,  137,  2d;  a,  ao., 
147  h. 

taka,  dem.  prn.  tlmt  little,  110  a  3  ; 
117  a. 

t&tas,  adv.  thence,  synt.  use,  180. 

td.ti,  nm.  der.  so  many,  118  «. 

tatpiirusa   compounds,   100,  I  a  ; 
187,  2  a  ;  w.  ace.  sense,  187  A  1, 
inst.,  A  2,  dat.,  A  3,  abl.,  A  4, . 
gen.,  A5,  loc, ,  A  6;  asjjossessives, 
189,  2  ;  accentuation  of,  i).456, 2, 

tatha,  adv.  thus,  110  a  ;  179,  1  ; 
syut.  use,  180, 

tad,  adv.  then,  ihitlier,  synt.  use, 
ISO. 

tadapas,  Bv.  cd.  accustomed  to  that 
'Cork,  110  a. 

tada,  adv.  then,  179,  3. 

tadanim,  adv.  then,  179,  3  /i. 

tan,  stretch,  pr.  stem,  134  C  4  a  ; 
pf.,  137,  2rt,  &;  140,  1.  2;  s  ao., 
144,  2  ;  144,  5  ;  rt,  ao.,  148,  1  d; 
ps.  stem,  154  d. 

tan,  f.  successio)i,  77,  5 ;  accent, 
p.  458,  c  1. 

-tana,  secondary  nom.  sf.,  182,  2. 

-tana,  ending  of  2.  pi.  impf.  and 
ipv.,  133  A  5. 

tauu,  a,  thin,  98  c. 


tauu,  f.   body,  p.    89  vpar.)  ;    self, 

n^b. 

tandri,  f.  iceariness,  p.  88  a. 
tap,    heat,    pf,    137,  2  a  ;     138  b  ; 
140,  1  ;   s  ao.,  144,  2  ;   red.   au. 
sb.,  149,  2. 
tapus,  a.  hot,  83,  2  c. 
ta,ia,  faint,  pr.  stem,  133  B  3. 
-tania,  sec.  spv.  sf.,  103,  1 ;  ill  b; 
120  a;   182  ;  ord.  sf.,  107  ;    ad- 
verbs formed  \v.,  p.  301  ;S;  ac- 
centuation of,  p.  454,  9  B  b. 
t&T,  f.  star,  82,  f.  n.  5  ;  82  6, 

-tar,  loc.  inf.  of  stems  in,  167,  4  b. 

-tara,  sec,  cpv.  sf.,  103,  1  ;  117  6; 
120  a  ;  182,  2  ;  adverbs  formed 
w.,  p.  301  0. 

tarhi,  adv.  then,  synt,  use,  ISO. 

tavastara,  cpv.  stronger,  103,  1, 

-tavai,  dat.  inf.  in,  senses  of, 
211,  16  5;  accentuation  of, 
p.  4.52,  7. 

-tavya,  gdv.  sufQx,  162  ;  162,  5 ; 
209,  5. 

tavyaras,  cpv.  stronger,  103,  2  «. 

-tas,  adv.  sf.,  vv,  abl.  sense,  179,  2. 

tasthivams,  pf.  pt,  of  stha,  89  a. 

t^smad,  abl.  adv,  therefore,  180. 

-ta,  secondaiy  nom.  sf.,  182,  2. 

-tat,  sec.  nom.  sf.,  182,  2  ;  stems 
in,  77,  1  ;  adv.  sf.  w.  abl.  sense, 
179,  2  ;  ending  of  2,  s,  pr.  ipv. 
act.,  p.  125;  133  A  4  ;  133  C3  a; 
134  C  4  S  ;  168  e,  f.  n.  2  (_cs.). 

-tati,  secondary  nom.  sf. ,  182,  2. 

tad,  adv.  thus,  178,  5. 

tadrs,  prn.  cd.  such,  117. 

tadfsa,  prn.  cd.,  sucJi,  p.  113, 
f.'n.  4, 

tavaka,  jdoss.  prn.  thy,  116  6. 

tavant,  prn.  der.  so  great,  118  c. 

-ti,  nm.  a.  sf.,  118  a;  pri.  nom. 
sf.,  182,  1  6. 

tirasci,  m.  a  man's  name,  100, 1  b, 

tiras,  prp.  across,  w.  ace,  176,  1  ; 
197  B  c  ;  adv.  across,  179,  2  ; 
aside,  compounded  w.  verbs, 
184  b. 

tiryauc,  a.  transverse,  93  a. 

tiksnd,,  a.  sharp,  103,  2  /3. 

tiksniyams,  cpv,  sharper,  103,  2  ,3. 

tu,  pel.  thefi,  hut,  synt,  use,  ISO. 


1819 


I     1 


482 


VEDIC   INDEX 


-tu,  pri.  noiii.  sf.,  182,  1  b. 

tud,  thrust,  pr.,  125,  2  ;    133  C  1  ; 

pf.,  138,  1. 
-tum,  ace.  iiif,  in,  p.  191;  211,  2  b. 
turiya,  ord.  fourth,  107. 
tuvisvan,  a.  roaring  aloud,  77,  5, 
-tr,  pri.  nom.  sf.,  182,  1  &;  stems 

'in,  101,  2  ;  p.  453,  9  Ad. 
trca,  m.  n.  triplet,  p.  14G,  11  A. 
trliya,  ord.  third,  107  ;  120  c  3. 
trp,  he  pleased,  pr.  stem,  133  C  1. 
trsnaj,  a.  thirsty,  79,  3  b. 
trh,  crush,  pr.  stem,  134  D  2. 
tr,  cross,  pr.  stem,  133  B  2 ;  133  C  3. 
te,  end.  dat.  gen.  s.  of  tvdm,  thou, 

109  a;  p.  452,  8  A  a. 
t^jistha,  spv.  verij  sliarp,  1 03,  2. 
tsjiyams,  cpv.  sharper,  103,  2. 
tena,  inst.  adv.  therefore,  180. 
Taittiriya   Aranyaka,    accented, 

p.  448,  1. 
Taittiriya  Brahmma,  accented, 

p.  448,  1  ;  p.  449.  ' 
Taittiriya  Sanihita,lio\v  accented , 

p.  449, 
-tos,  abl.   gen.  inf.  in,  107,  3  b  ; 

211,  3  b. 
-tta,   syncoi^ated  \>\).  of  da,  gice, 

160,  2  b. 
-tna,  sec.  nom.  suffix,  182,  2. 
-tnu,  pri.  nom.  suffix,  182,  1  b. 
tm&n,  m.  self,  90,  2. 
tya,    dem.    prn.    tliat,    110   a   2; 

195  B  5. 
-tya,  sec.  nom.  suffix,  182,  2. 
-tya,  gd.  suffix,  164  ;  165  ;  210. 
tyaj,/o)srtA:t,  pr.  stem,  135,  4. 
tydd,  dem.  prn.  n.  as  adv.,  195  B  5, 
-tra,  pri.  nom.  suffix,  182,  1  b. 
tra,  adv.  sf.  w.  loc.  sense,  179,  3  ; 

=  loc,  179,  3  a. 
traya,  nm.  der.  threefold,  108  c. 
tra,  protect,  s  ao.  op.,  143,  4. 
tra,  m.  protector,  97,  2. 
-tra,  pri.  nom.  sf.,  182,  1  b. 
tri,  nm.  three,  104  ;  105,  3  (.par.)  ; 

in  Bv.  compounds,  i).455,  10c,  rf. 
trims^t,    nm.    thirty,    104;    106  d 

(par.\ 
tridha,    nm.    adv.    in   three    loays, 

108  b. 
trivrt,  a.  threefold,  77. 


tristubh,  f.  triple  praise,  78,  2 
(.par.) ;  a  metre,  p.  438,  f  n.  1,2 ; 
2^.441,5;  triplets,  p.  446,  11  A. 

tris,  nm.  adv.  thrice,  108  «  ;  179,  1  ; 
Av.  gen.,  202  1)  3, 

tredlia,   nm.   adv.    in   three   ways, 

108  b. 

tva,  dem.  prn.  'Duaiy  a  one,  112  «  a 

(par.) ;  p.  452,  8  A  a. 
tvi,  130SS.  prn.,  thy,  116  b. 
tva-  =  tvam,  thou,  in  derivatives 

or  as   first    member   of  a  cd., 

109  b. 

-tva,  sec.  nom.  suffix,  182,  2  ;  sf. 

forming     gdv.,    162  ;    162,    4  ; 

209,  2. 
tvao,  f.  skin,  79,  1 . 
tvad-,  prs.  prn.  as  first  member 

of  a  cd.,  109  b. 
tvadyoni,  a.  derived  from  thee,  109  b. 
-tvana,  sec.  nom.  suffix,  182,  2. 
tvam,  prs.  piui.  thou,  109  (par.), 
tvayata,  Tj).  cd.  pirescnted  by  thee, 

109  b. 
tva,  end.  prs,  prn.  ace,  of  tvam, 

109  a  ;  p.  452,  8  A  u. 
-tva,  suffix  of  gd.,  163,  2;  210. 
-tvaya,  suffix  of  gd.,  163,  3  ;  210  ; 

added  to  cs.  stem,  jj.  189,  f.  n.  1. 
tvav^,  emphasizing  pel.,  180. 
tvavant,  pi-n.  der.  like  thee,  118  c, 
tvis,  he  stirred,  pr.  steni,  134  A  4  c. 
tvis,  f.  excitement,  80. 
-tvi,suffix  of  gd.,  163,  1  ;  210. 
tvdi,  l^cl.  bv.t  indeed,  180. 
t%?iT, approach  stealthily,  s  ao.,  144,  5. 

-Tha,  pri.  nom.  sf.,  182,  1  b ;  sec. 

nom.  suffix,  182,  2. 
-tham,  adv.  suffix,  179,  1  a. 
-tha,  pri.  vom.  sutfix,  182,  1  h. 
-tha,     adv.     suffix     of     manner 

(=inst.),  179,  1, 

Dams,  bite,  pr.  stem,  133  A  4. 
dSksat,  ao.  pt.  of  dah,  lurn,  85  b. 
daksinatds,    adv.  from    the    right, 

179,'  2  ;  w.  gen.,  202  D. 
daksinatra,     adv.     on     tlie    right, 

179,'  3. 
d^ksinena,  adv.  soidh  of,  w.  ace, 

1 97  B  c  /8  ;  p.  209,  f.  n.  8, 


VEDIC   INDEX 


483 


dagh,  reach,   rt.   ao.  iiij.,  l-tS,  '6  ; 

i^jv.,  148,  5  ;  pre,  148,  4  a. 
datta,  pp.   of  da,  give,  IfiO,   2  6  ; 

134  B  3  ^. 
dMat,  pr.  pt.  of  da,  ijke,  85  b. 
dadhi,  ii.  citrih,  99,  4. 
dadhfk,  adv.  boldhj,  80. 
dadhfs,  a.  hold,  80. 
dtot.  111.  iootib,  85  a. 
dabh,  harm,  pf.,  137,  2  ((. 
dam,  n.  (?),  house,  78,  3. 
-dam,  adv.  suffix  of  time,  179,  3. 
d^mpati,    m.     lord    of   the     house, 

78,  3  (( ;  p.  273,  f.  n.  3. 
daviyams,/tty7//e/-,  103,  2  a. 
d^sa,  nm.  ten,  106  c  (par.), 
dasataya,  nui.  der.  tenfold,  108  c. 
dasama,  ord.  tenth,  107. 
ddsyave  vfka,  m.  Wolf  to  theBasiju, 

as  a  name,  200  A  2  «  7. 
dah,  burn,  s  ao.,  144,  5  ;  s  ao.  pt., 
143  6:    15(5  a;    ft.,   151  n  ;    pt., 
151  6  2. 

1.  da,  rjive,  pr.  stem,  134  B  1  6; 
134  B  3  a;  134  B  3 /a;  pf.  pt.^ 
157  ;  157  6  a ;  s  ao.,  144,  3  ; 
a  ao.,  147  a  1  ;  rt.  ao.  inj., 
148,  3;  op.,  148,  4;  ft.,  151  a; 
pp.,  ICO,  2  b. 

2.  da,  cut,  s  ao. ,  144,  3  ;  op.,  143,  4. 
da,  m.  fjiver,  97,  2. 

-da,  adv.  suffix  of  time,  179,  3. 
datar,  m.  giver,  101,  2  (par.). 
-danim,     adv.     suffix     of     time. 

179,3)3, 
daman,  11.  givimj,  90,  2. 
daru,  11.  irood,  98  a  (p.  S3). 
davan,  n.  giving,  90,  3. 
das,  f.  worship,  79,  4. 
dasat,  pr.   pt.    ivorshipping,   85  h  ; 

15<:>  «. 
dasivams,  uured.  pf.  pt.,  157  h. 
dasvams,  unred.  2>f.  j)t.,  157  b. 
didrks6nya,  ds.  gdv.  ivorthij  to  he 

seen,  162,  3. 
A\v,2)laij,  fourth  conj.  class,  125, 3. 
div,  m.  f.  skij,  99,  5  (p.  85,  f.  n.  1). 
diva,  inst.  adv.  hy  da>j,  178,  3. 
div^dive,    itv.    cd.    day    hg    dag, 

189  C  «  ;  200  B  3  a. 
dis,    f.    direction,    63  b    (f,    n.    1) ; 

79,  4. 


dip,  shine,  irr.  red.  ao. ,  149  a  1. 
dirgha,  a.  long,  103,  2  a. 
diighana,    pr.    i)t.    mid.    of    duh, 

milk,  158  a. 
dus,  spoil,  OS.  future  of,  151  a  a. 
dustdra,  a.  hard  to  cross,  50  b. 
duhsaha,  a.  hard  to  resist,  50  b. 
dus-,  adv.  in  cds.,  Sandlii  of,  49  c ; 

accent  of,  }:>.  455,  10  c  a. 
duh,  viilh;   pr.   stem,   134  A  4  !> ; 

134  A  4  c  a  ;  sa  ao.,  141  a  ;  s  ao. 

02^.,  143,  4. 
duhana,  pr.pt.,  mid.  of  duh,  158a. 
duhitd.r,  f.  daughter,  101,  2. 
do,  f.  gijt,  100  II  a. 
dvidabha,  a.  hard  to  deceive,  49  c. 
dudas,  a.  not  -worshipping,  49  c. 
dudhi,  a.  malevolent,  49  c. 
dund,sa,  a.  liard  to  attain,  49  c, 
duriasa,  a.  liard  to  destroy,  49  c. 
duti,  f.  messenger,  p.  88  «. 
dura,  a.  far,  cpv.  of,  103,  2  d. 
duram,  adv.ya;-,  178,  2. 
durat,  abl.  adv. /row*  afar,  178,  5 
dur§,  loc.  adv.  afar,  178,  7, 
dr,  tear,  s  ao.  op.,  143,  4;  rt.ao. 

'148,  1  d. 
-drksa,  sf.  in  prn.  cds.  =hA,e,  117. 
drs,  see,  pf.  pt.,  157  ;  rt.  ao.  inj., 
'14S,  3;  pt.,  148,  6  ;  a  ao.,  147  c  ; 

ps.  ao.,  155. 
drs,  f.  look,  63  b  (f.  n.  1)  ;  79,  4. 
-drs,  sf.  in  prn.  cds.  =  like,  111, 
drse,  to  see,  dat.  inf.,  167  a  (p.  191). 
dr.sdd,  f.  nether  millstone,  77,  3  b. 
drh,  makeftr)n,  pr.  sttm,  133  C  1. 
deya,  gdv.  to  he  given,  162,  1  a. 
Devata-dvandva  cds.,  accent  of, 

p.  457,  e  /3. 
devatat,  f.  divine  service,  77,  1. 
devatta,  Tp.  cd.  given  by  the  gods, 

160,  2  &. 
devadrydnc,  a.  godward,  93  (p.  73, 

f.  n.  1). 
devasas,  adv.   to  eacli  of  t/ie  gods, 

179,  1. 
devanc,  a.  gvdward,  93  b. 
devi,  f.  goddess,  100  I  b  (par.). 
devf,  m.  liusband^s  brother,  101,  1. 
dehi,  2.  s.  pr.  ipv.  act.  of  da,  give, 

134  Bib. 
6.6s,  n.  arm,  83,  1. 

i   2 


484 


VEDIC   INDEX 


dydv,  m.  f.  aJiij,  99,  5  (p,  85,  f.  n.  1). 
dyavah,  N.  p],  the  (three)  heavens, 

19.3,  3  a. 
dyava,   elliptical  du.  heaven   and 

earth,  193,  2a;  186  B  3  a. 
dyu,  m.  day,  98  d ;  m.  f.  sky,  99,  5 

(par.), 
dyut,   shine,    pf.,    139,  8  ;    s   ao., 

144,  5;    red.   ao.,    149,   1;    irr. 

red.  ao.,  149  a  1. 
dyut,  f.  brilliance,  77,  1. 
dyo,  111.  f.  sky,  102  ;  102,  3  (par.) ; 

accentuation  of,  \>.  458,  c  1. 
dyaus,  m.  N.  of  dyo,  sky,  99,  5  ; 

voc,    accentuation  of,    p.  457, 

lift, 
draghman,  m.  length,  90,  2. 
draghistha,  spv.  longest,  103,  2  a. 
draghiyams,  cpv.  longer,  103,  2  a. 
drii,  11.  ?i'oorf,  accent,  ji.  458  c  1. 
drvih,  m.  fiend,  81. 
dva,  mil.  <too,  104  ;  105,  2  (par.', 
dvandva,    n.  pair,    189    (p.    282, 

f.  n.  4)  ;   compounds,  18G  ;   ac- 
centuation of,  p.  457,  10,  2  c. 
dvayfi,  nin.  der.  twofold,  108  c. 
dvadasa,  nm.   twelve,    104  ;    10(5  c 

(par.), 
dvapaueasa,  ovd.  fifty-second,  107. 
dvar,  f.  dooj-,  82  (f.  n.  5)  ;  82  a. 
dvi,  mil.   two,   in  cds.   and  der., 

105,    2   (f.  n.  2)  ;    in  Bv.  com- 

l^ounds,  p.  455,  10  c  o. 
dvita,  adv.  doubly,  synt.  use,  180. 
dvitiya,  ord.  second,  107. 
dvidha,    nin.   adv.   in    two    ways, 

108  h;  179,  1. 
dvipada,    f.   stanza    of  two   verses, 

p.  441,  5  a. 
dvipada  viraj,  f.  a  metre,  p.  437, 

f.  n.  2  ;  p.  443. 
dvis,  hate,  sa  aorist,  141  a. 
dvis,  f.  hatred,  80. 
dvis,  11111.  adv.  ttrice,  108  a  ;  179,  1  ; 

w.  gen.,  202  D  3. 

Dh,  stems  in,  77,  4. 

-dhak  =^  -dah.  +  s,  N.  sing.,  81  a. 

dhaksat,  s  ao.   pt.  of  dah,  burn, 

85  b  ;  143,  6. 
dhanvan,  n.  boiv,  90,  3. 
dhartr,  n.  ^nop,  101,  2  b. 


1.  dha,  2'"U  I'l'-  stem,  134  B  1  ?) ; 
134  B  3  a;  134  B  3  /S  ;  pf., 
137,  2e;  138,  3;  a  ao.,  147  a  1 ; 
rt.  ao.  inj.,  148,  3  ;  op.,  148,  4  ; 
ipv.,  148,  5  ;  ps.  ao.,  155. 

2.  dha,  suck,  pr.  stem,  133  B  1. 
-dha,  adv.  sf.  of  manner,  179,  1. 
-dhi,  compounds  in,  98  d. 

-dhi,     2.    s.    ii>v.     act.     ending, 

134  C  4  5. 
dhik,  ij.fie!  w.  ace,  197  Hey. 
dhi,  f.  thought,  100,   I  a  ;    100,  I  b 

vpar.). 
-dhuk  =  -duh  +  s,  N.  s.  milking,  81  a. 
dhur,  f.  burden,  82,  f.  n.  5. 
dhursad,  a.  being  on  the  yoke,  49  d. 
dhiirsah,  a.  bearing  the  yoke,  49  d. 
dhr,  hold,   irr.   red.  ao.,  149  a  1  ; 

inj.,   149,  3;    ip\.,  149,  5;    ps. 

stem,  154  d  ;  cs.  ft.,  151  a  a. 
dhrsaj,  a.  bold,  79,  3  b. 
dhrsad,  f.  nether  millstone,  77,  3  b. 
dhehi,  2.  s.  pr.  ipv.  act.   of  dha, 

put,  1.34  B  1  &. 
dhmatf,  n.  smithy,  101,  2  b. 
-dhyai,     inf.,    used     elliptically, 

211,  1  b  y. 
-dhruk  =  druh-f  s,    N.    s.    haling, 

81  a. 
-dhva,    ending    of    2.    pi.    mid., 

133  A  5. 
dhvams,  scalier,  a  ao.,  147  b. 
-dhvam,    2.  pi.  ending,    cerebra- 

lized,  144,  2  a. 

W,  dental  nasal,  never  cerebra- 
lized  in  ghn  =  han,  in  cds., 
50cl3  ;  inserted,  in  N.  s.,  79,4  a, 
in  N.  pi.  n.  of  as,  is,  us  stems, 
SB;  loss  of:  in  pr.,  134  A  2  c, 
p.  121,  f.  n.  1,  134  A  4  a,  in 
iinal  an  steins  of  Karmadlia- 
rayas,  188,  2  a,  of  Baliuvrihis, 
189,  4  a,  in  -ant,  156  a ;  steins 
in  radical,  77,  5  ;  intiuence  of 
stems  in,  98  ;  98  «. 

na,  pel.  not,  180  ;  w.  sb.,  215  C2(i, 
w.  inj.  (=ft.),  215  c  1,  w.  op., 
p.  362  a,  p.  364  7,  w.  pre,  217  ; 
like,  180. 

-na,  pri.  noiii.  sf.,  182,  1  b  ;  pp. 
sf.,  160. 


VEDIC   INDEX 


485 


ndkis,  inclec.    prn.  no   one,   never, 

ISO;  113,  f.  n.  2. 
nakim,  adv.  prn.  never,  180. 
nSktam,  ace.  adv.  hij  night,  178,  2; 

197  A  5  a. 
naktaya,  inst.  adv.  h>/  nir/h(,  17S,  3o. 
nadi,  f.  stream,  100,  I  a  •  100,  I  b  a. 
n^dh,  f.  bond,  77,  4. 
nfinandr,  m.husbancVs  sinter,  101, 1. 
ndnu,  adv.  by  no  means,  ISO. 
n^pat,  m.  grandson,  101.  2,  f.  n.  5  : 

101,2  a. 
ndp tr,  m . r/ran<Zson,  101,2;  101,  2(i. 
ndbh,  f.  destroyer,  78,  2. 
nam,  /lenrt,  pf.,  137,  2  w. 
nd.mas,  n.  obeisance,  w.  kr,  184  r. 
namasyd,  den.,  175  B  (par.), 
n^mi,  m.  a  name,  100,  I  b. 
ndva,   a.   neir,    cpv,    and  spv.   of, 

103,  2  /3. 
n^va,  nm.  nine,  104  ;  106  c  (pai".\ 
navati,    nm.    ninety,    104 ;    106  rf 

I'par.). 
ndvadasa,     nm.     nineteen,      104  ; 

106  c  (par.}. 

navadha,  nm.  adv.   in  nine  n-ays, 

108  b. 

navama,  ord.  ninth,  107. 
ndvistha,  spv.  newest,  103,  2  j8. 
i!d,vedas,  a.  cognisant,  83,  2  a  a, 
ndviyams,  cpv.  neiver,  103,  2  /S. 
n^vyasa,  inst.  adv.  anew,  178,  3. 
navyams,  cpv.  newer,  103,  2  «. 

1.  nas,  reach,  rt.  ao.,  148,  1  d,  inj., 
148,  3,  op.,  148,  4. 

2.  nas,  be  lost,   red.    ao,,    149,    1  ; 
irr.,  149  a  2. 

nds,  f.  wzgi/t^,  79,  4. 

nas,  pin.  m,s,  ace,  dat.,  gen.,  pi., 

109  a ;  p.  452,  8  A  a. 

rahi,  adv. /or  not,  by  no  means,  180. 

n^hus,  m.  neighbour,  S3,  2  c. 

-na,   coniugational   class   formed 

w.,  127,  5. 
-na,  pri.  nom.  suffix,  182,  1  b. 
nanadhi,  a.  harimi diverse  intentions, 

ICO,  I  a. 
nama,  adv.  /.*/  name,  178,  2  ;    180  ; 

197  A  5  a. 
namdtha,  adv.  by  name,  179,  1. 
na^,  f.  nose,  S3,  1, 
-ni,  pri,  nom.  suffix,  182,  1  b. 


nii,    ^rash,    s   ao ,    144,    2 ;     int., 

174  (par.), 
nity^m,  adv.  constantly,  178,  2. 
nid,  f.  contempt,  77,  3  rt. 
nidhi,  m.  treasury,  98  d. 
nimriic,  f.  sunset,  79,  1. 
niyuta,    n.     a    hvndred    thousand, 

104. 
nirnij,  f.  bright  garmeid,  79,  3  a. 
njh,  f.  destroyer,  81. 
ni,  lead,  pf.,   138,  4  ;   s  ao.    ipv., 

143,  5  ;  ft.,  151  a. 
-ni,  secondary  nom.  sf.,  182,  2. 
nu  or  nu,  adv.  noiv,  synt.  use,  180. 
-nu,  pri.  nom,  suffix,  182,  1  b. 
-nu,    conj.     class    formed    with, 

127,  3. 
nud,  push,   rt.    ao.    in.j.,    148,    3  ; 

ft.  sb.,  151  b  1. 
-nude,   dat.    inf,    to  push,    167   a 

;p.  191). 
nu  aid,  adv.  never,  w,  op..  216,  2  «  a 

(p.  362), 
nunim,  adv.  non^,  178,  2  a  ;  ISO. 
nf,  m.  man,  101,  1  ;  accentuation 

of,  ]>.  458,  c  1. 
nft,  f.  dancing,  77,  1. 
ned,    neg.    pel.    certainly   not,    lest, 

180 ;     that     not     w.     sb.,     215 

(p.  .355  a)  ;   accents  verb,  467, 

19  B. 
nedistha,  spv.  nearest,  103,  2  b. 
nedisthara,  adv.  nearest,   w.  gen,, 

202'D. 
nediyas,    adv.    nearer,     w.    gen., 

202  D. 
nediyams,  cpv.  nearer,  103,  2  ti. 
nema,  prn.  other,  120  c  2  (par.), 
nau,  end.  dii.  prn.  us  two,  109  a  ; 

p.  452,  8  A  rt. 
ndu,  f.  ship,  102  ;  102,  4  (par.^, 
nyi,ac,  a.  dmcnirard,  93  a. 
nyarbuda,  n.  «  hundred   millions, 

104, 
-ns,  original  ending  of  ace.  pi.  of 

a  stems,  97,  f.  n.  8  (p.  78). 

Pankti,  stanza,  p.  440,  c;  triplets, 

p.  446,  11  A. 
pac,  co'.Je,  pf.,  187.  2  a, 
pdnca,  nm.  //re.  104  ;    106  c  (par.). 


486 


VEDIC   INDEX 


p^ncadasa,  nm.  fifteen,  104  ;  106  c 

(par.)._^ 
pancadha,  nm.  adv.  in  five  icays, 

lOS  h. 
pancamd,  ord.  fifth,  107. 
pancas^t,  nm.  fifty,  104. 
pat, fiijJaU,  pf.,  137,  2 a;  137,  2  b a; 

pf.  pt.,  1.57  a  ;  red.  ao.,  149  a  2, 

ipv.,  149,  5. 
patfiya,  iterative  vb.  fiy  about,  168. 
p&ti,  m.  husband,  lord,  99,  1  ;   ac- 
centuation of,  in  cds.,  p.  456, 2a. 
p&tir    din,    m.  lord   of    the    house, 

78,  3  a. 
pitni,  f.  luife,  lady,  99,  1  ;  as  f.  for 

pfiti  when  final  member  of  Bv., 

1 89,  4  e. 
pith,  ni.pa^A,  77,  2. 
pithi,  m.  2ya(h,  99,  2  a. 
pad,  ?taZfc,  precative,  148,  4  a. 
pid,  m,/oo<,  77,  3  a. 
pada-patha,  ni.  Pada  text,  2;  2o  c  a. 

f.  n.  l'{p.  26);   p.  25,   f.  n.   2; 

41a;  p.  33.  f.  n.  5  ;  p.  37,  f.  n.  5  ; 

p.   64,   f.   n.  3;  p.  67,  f.  n.  4  ; 

p.  205,  f  n.  3  ;   p.  206,  f.  n.  2; 

p.  454,  10  a. 
pan,  admire,  pf.,  137,  2  b. 
pinthan,  m.  2Mth,  91,  1. 
piutha,  m  path,  97,  2  a. 
pinyams,     cpv.     more     wonderful. 

103,/2  a. 
papivaras,  pf  pt.  of  pa,  drink,  89  «. 
paptivams,  pf.  pt.  of  pat,  fly,  89  a. 
-paya,  cs.  suffix,  168  d ;  irr.  2. 
pira,    a.   tdterior,    120  c  2  (par.)  ; 

higher,  as  final  member  of  Bv.. 

189,  1  b. 
parami,  sp\.  farthest,  120  c  1. 
paris,  adv.  beyond,  179,  3  ;  prp.  w. 

ace,  177,  1,  inst.,  177,  2,   abl., 
.  177,  3. 
pardstad,  adv.  prp.  after,  w.  gen., 

177,  4,  f.  n,  1  ;  above,  202  D. 
piranc,  a.  turned  an-ay,  93  6. 
paraddi,  dat.  inf.  to  c/ire  up,  p.  79. 

f.  n.  1  ;  p.  191. 
piri,  prp.  around,  w.  ace.  and  abl., 

176,  1  a. 
pirijman,  a.  going  round,  90,  1  a. 
paritas,  adv.  round  about,  179,  2  ; 

prp.  around,  w.  ace,  177,  1. 


paribhvi,  a.  surrounding,  98  d. 
paribhu,  a.  surrounding,  100,  II  o. 
piritta,  pp.  of  pari-da,  give  airai/, 

160,  2  b. 
pdrena,  inst.  adv.  beyond,  \v.  ace, 

197  B  c  /3  ;  p.  209,  f.  n.  3. 
parvasas,  adv.  joint  by  joint ,  179,  J. 
pas  =  spas,  see,  pr.  stem,  133  B  1. 
pds,  f.  sight,  79,  4. 
pasutrp,  a.  delighting  in  cattle,  78,  1, 
pasumdnt,  a.  possessing  cattle,   86 

(p./)4,  f.  n.  3). 
pasca,  adv.  behind,  178,  3  b. 
pascat,     abl.    adv.    from     behind, 

178,  5  ;  w.  gon.,  202  D. 
pascatat,  adv. />'om  behind,  179,  2. 

1.  pa,  drink,  pr.  stem,  133  A  3  «  : 
134  B  3  ;3,  rt.  ao.  pre,  148.  4  a  : 
ipv.,  148,  5. 

2.  pa,  protect,  pr.  stem,  134  A  4  c. 
Panini,  m.  a  grammarian,  15. 
pad,  m.foot,  77,  3. 

pada,  in.  foot,  compounded  w.  gd., 

184  c  ;  quarter  stanza,  verse,  16  ; 

18  a;  48;  p.  436,  1. 
papa,  a.  bad,  cpv.  of,  p.  96,  f.  n.  1. 
papiyams,  cpv.  worse,  p.  96,  f.  n.  1. 
pitir,  m.  father,  lOJ,  2  (par.), 
pitara,   elliptical   du.,  father  and 

mother,  186  B  3  «;  193,  2  «. 
pinv,/«f/en,  133  A  3  b  ;  134  C  4  /3. 
pis,  adorn,  pr.  stem,  133  C  1. 
pis,  f.  ornament,  79,  4. 
pumscalu,  f.  courtesan,  p.  89,  f.  n.  1 . 
pums,  m.  man,  83,  1  ;  96,  3. 
pur,  f.  stronghold,  82  (par.), 
purausnih,  f.  a  metre,  p.  444,  2. 
puris,    adv.   before,   179,  3  ;    prp. 

before,  w.  loe,  ace,  abl.,  176,  2  ; 

202  D  ;  compounded  w.  verbs, 

184  b. 
puristad,   adv.    in   front,    179,    2  ; 

prp.  in  front  of,  w.  gen.,  177,  4  ; 

202  D.  " 
pura,     adv.     formerly,     w.      pr., 

212  A  2  a  ;    w.  sma,  180 ;    prp. 

before,  w.  abl.,  ace,  inst.,  177,  3  ; 

179,  3  7. 

puranavit,  adv.  as  of  old,  179,  1. 
puru,  a.  much,  in  Bv.  compounds, 
p.  455,  10  c  a. 


VEDIC   INDEX 


487 


purutra,     adv.     in    mam/    plara^, 

170,  :;. 
purudha,  ailv,  variously,  179,  1. 
purodas,  m.  sacrificial  cake,  79,  4  a. 
pu,  p'irifij,  pr.  stem,  134  E  1. 
purpati,  m.  lord  of  the  stronghold, 

49  (L 
purva,  a.   prior,   120  c   2  (par  .)  ; 

p.  454,  10. 
purvdtha,  m\v  .  formerly ,  179,  1. 
puivam,  :iAv .  formerly ,  178,  2. 
purvavd,t,  adv.  as  of  old,  179,  1. 
pusdn,  m.  a  god,  90  (p.  68). 
pr,  cross,  pr.  stem,  134  B  3  a  ;  s  ao. 

ipv.,   143,  5  ;  red.  ao.,   l-l9,   1  ; 

loo.  inf.,  167,  4  c. 
prks,  f.  satiation,  80. 
pre,  mix,  s  ao,,  144,  4.  5. 
pfch,  a.  asking,  79,  2. 
prche,   dat.    inf,    to    ask,    79,    2  ; 

'167  rt(p.  191). 
prthivis,  f.  pi.  the  (three)  earths, 

"193,  3  a. 
prthi,  m.  a  man,  100,  I  b  (p.  87). 
pfsant,  (pt.")  a.  spotted,  85  a. 
Vflflil,  pr .  stem,  133  B  2,  134  E  4  a ; 

rt.  ao.  ipv.,  148,  5  ;  red.  ao,  ipv., 

149,  5  ;  ps.,  154,  4,  f.  n.  2  ;  cs., 

168,  irr,  5. 
pya,./?/i  np,  sis  aorist,  146. 
prakhydi,  dat,    inf.   to   see,   97,    2 

(p.  79),  f,  n.  1. 
pragatha,  m.  mixed  strophe,  p.  446,. 

11  B. 
pragrhya,    uncontractahle,    vowels, 

24-6;  24,  f.n.  2.;  p.  437,  f.  n,  3. 
prach,  uslc,  s  aorist,  144,  5, 
pratar^ra,    ace.    adv.    fwithermore, 

197  A  5  &  i3. 
prdti,  prp.  against,  w.  ace,  176,  1  ; 

197  B  c. 
pratimai,  dat.  inf.  to  imitate,  97,  2, 

f.  n.  1. 
pratitta,  pp.  of  prati-da,  flru'c  hack, 

160,  2  h. 
pratnatha,  adv.  as  of  old,  179,  1. 
pratnavdt,  adv.  as  of  old,  179,  1. 
pratyd.iie,    a.    turned    loicards,    93 

(par,)  ;  w.  ace,  197  B  a, 
pra,tha,m&.  Old.  first,  107;  120c 3. 
prathamam,      adv.      ace.      Jirst, 

J  97  A  5  b  a. 


prathamajd,  a.  ,/irst-born,  97,  3. 
prathlmdn,  m.  width,  90,  2. 
prame,  dat.  inf.  to  form,   167,   1, 

f.  n.  2  (p.  191). 
pray&j,  f.  offering,  79,  3  a. 
prayuta,  nm.  n.  million,  104. 
pravdt,  f.  height,  77,  1. 
pras,  ask,  jjr.  stem,  133  C  2. 
prahye,  dat.    inf.    to   send,   167  « 

(p.  181). 
pra,   fill,    irr.   pf.,   136,    4 ;    s   ao., 

144,  5. 
praktat,  adv.  from  the  front,  179,  2. 
piaeS,,  inst.  adv.  forwards,  178,3  b. 
praac,  a.  forward,  93  b. 
pratdr,  adv.  early,  \v.  gen.,  202  D  2. 
prataritvas,  v.  of -van  stem,  90,  3. 
pradiir,  adv.  before  the  door,  w.  bhu, 

184  b. 
prds,  f.  dispute,  79,  4. 
priyS,  a,  clear,  97,   1  (par.)  ;   sec. 

opv.  of,  103,  1. 
priyadha,  adv.  kindly,  179,  1. 
preradn,  m.  love,  90,  2. 
preyam.s,  pii,  epv.  of  priy£,  dear, 

103, '2  rt  ;  f.  of,  88,  f.  n.  1. 
pr6stha,  spv.  dearest,  103,  2  a. 
plu,  floctt,  red.  acrist,  149,  1. 
psvlr,  f.  victimls,  82,  f.  n  5. 

Phat,  ij.  crash!  181. 
ph^I,  ij.  splash !  181. 

Bdt,  ij.  truly,  181. 

bata,  ij.  cdas  !  181. 

bandh,  bind,  pr.  stem,  134  E  3,  4  ; 

pf.,    139,    1  ;    ft.,    151    a  ;    ps., 

154,5. 
babhru,  a.  f.  brown,  100,  II  h. 
barhistha,  spv.  very  lofty,  103,  2  a, 
bahirdha,  adv.   outivard,   179,    1  ; 

prp./*'o»i  Old,  w.  abl.,  177,  3. 
balLVi,  a.  much,  in  Bv.  compounds, 

p.  455,  10  c  a. 
bahutia,  adv.  among  many,  179,  3. 
bahudha,    adv.     in     many     ways, 

11^,  1. 
bahuvrihi    (a.    Jawing   much   rice) 

compounds,  100,  I  a  ;  189  ;  as 

substantives,    189,    3  ;    ending 

modifitd,   189,  4  d  ;  suffixts  a. 


488 


VEDIC   INDEX 


ya,  ka,  in  added  to,  189,  4  h,  c; 
accentuation  of,  p.  455,10  c 
barhata  pragatha,  m.  a   kind  of 

viixed  strophe,  p.  44G,  11  B  2. 
bal,  ij.  (J ash  !  181. 
bibibabliavant,  pt.  cracklhiy,  ISl  d. 
bibhyat,  pr.  pt.  of  bhi, /car,  85  h. 
bibhatsia,  ds.a.  loathing,  100.  II  h  a, 

f.  n.  3. 
budh,  wake,  ao.,   141  ;   it.  ao.  pt., 

148,  6  ;  red.  ao.,  149,  1  ;  ps.  ao., 

1.55. 
brhati,  f.  a   metre,   p.  444.   8  h  ; 

■p.  446,  11  A. 
Brliadaranyaka     Upanisad,     ac- 
cented, p.  448,  1. 
brbant,  (pt.)  a.  great,  85  a  ;   cpv. 

of,   103,   2  a;   accentuation  of, 

p.' 4.59. 
bodhi,  2.  s.  ipv.  rt.  ao.  of  bhu,  he 

and  budh,  wnlce,  148,  5  ;  cp,  62, 

f.  n.  1 . 
bru,  speal;  pr.  stem,  134  A  1  f  a  ; 

134  A  4  r  a. 

-Bha,  sec.  nom.  suffix,  182,  2. 
bhagavattara,  cpv.  more  bounteous, 

103,  1. 
bhdgavant,  a.  bounteous,  86. 
bbaj,  share,  pf.,  139,  1  ;  s.  ao.  op., 

143,  4;    red.   ao.,    149,   1  ;    cs., 

1.54,  6  a. 
bharij,  hreal;  pr.  stem,  134  D  1  ; 

pr.  pt.,  85  ;  ps.,  154.  5. 
bhadrapapas,  N.  pi.  Dv.  cd.,  the 

good  and  the  bad,  186  A  2. 
bhartf,  a.  supporting,  101,  2  b. 
bharbharabliavat,    impf.     became 

confounded,  184  d. 
bbala,  pel.  indeed,  p.  452,  8  A/j. 
bhavan,    m.    Your   Honour,  w.    3. 

prs.  s.,  195  A  c. 
bhavlyams,  cpv.  more,  88. 
bhas,   chew,   pr.    stem,    134  B  3  ; 

134  BS  0. 
bhasdd,  f.  hind  quarters,  77,  8  h. 
-bhaj,  a.  sharing,  79,  3  a,  f.  n.  3. 
bhamitd,    den.    pp.   enraged,    160, 

3,  f.  n.  2. 
bbas,  n.  light,  83,  1. 
bhid,  pierce,  rt.  ao.,  148,  1  d  ;  in.]., 
148,  3. 


bhid,  f.  destroi/er,  77.  3  a. 

bhi,  f.fear,  100,  I  a. 

bhi,  fear,  s  ao.,  144,  2  ;  rt.  ao.  ini., 

148,  3,  pt.,    148,   6  ;    red.   ao., 

149,  1  ;  cs.,  168,  irr.  3. 
bhisaya,   cs.   frighten :    red.    ao., 

149  a  3. 
bhiik,  ij.  bang:  181. 

bhuj,  enjoij,  rt.  ao.  inj.,  148,  3. 

bhiije,  dat.  inf.,  to  enjoy,  167  a 
(p.  191). 

bhurij,  f.  arm,  79,  3  h. 

bhuv6,  inf.  to  be,  167  a  (p.  191\ 

bMi,  he,  as  representing  first  class 
of  the  aconj..  125, 1 ;  pr.  system 
of,  132  (par.);  pf.,  139,  7; 
140,  3.  4.  5;  pt.  157;  rt.  ao., 
148, 1  c  (par.^,  inj.,  148,  3,  pre, 
148,  4  a,  op..  148,  4,  ipv.,  148,  5  : 
red.  ao.,  149,  1,  pt.,  151  a  ; 
per.  ft.,  152. 

bhu,  f.  earth,  100,  II  a  ;  II  /;  (par.i. 

bhumdn,  m.  abundance,  90,  2. 

bhuman,  n.  cartli,  90.  2. 

bhumi,  f.  earth,  98  a. 

bhiiyas,  cpv.  adv.  ace.  more,  178.  2. 

bhiiyams,  cpv.  more,  88  ;  becoming 
wore,  103.  2  a  ;  as  final  member 
of  Bv.,  189,  1  fc. 

bhuyistha,  spv.  greatest,  103,  2  a. 

bhuridavattara,  cpv.  a.  giving  more 
cthundantlij,  103,  1. 

M,  final_,  before  vowels,  41,  some- 
times dropped,  41  a  ;  before 
consonants,  42  ;  42,  1,  f.  n.  1  ; 
unchanged  in  internal  Sandhi, 
68  ;  becomes  n,  68. 

ma-,  prn.  stem  of  first  prs.  in  der. 
and  cds.,  109  b. 

-ma,  pri.  nom.  sf.,  182.  1  li ;  sec. 
nom.  sf.,  182,  2  ;  p.  454,  9  B  r. 

m&mhistha,  spv.  most  liberal,  103, 2. 

maghavan,  a.  bountiful,  91,  5. 

mnghavant,  a.  bountiful,  91.  5, 
f.  n.  3. 

m&tkrta,  Tp.  cd.  dune  by  me,  109  6. 

mattas,  adv.  from  me,  179,  2. 

mad,  he  exhilarated,  pr.  stem, 
183  B  3  ;  rt.  ao.  ipv.,  148,  5. 

mad-,  prn.  stem  of  1st  prs., 
109  b. 


VEDTC   INDEX 


489 


madintara,   cpv.  more  qladdeniny, 

103,  1  a. 
md,dhu,  a.  sweet,  98  (par.), 
madhyamd,        spv.       middlemost, 

120  c  1. 
madhya^  inst.   adv.    in  the   midst, 

178,  3  h;  211,  3  h. 

man,  tJiink,   pr.  stem,  134  C  4  a  ; 

pf.,  187,  2  /'  ;  sao..  143,  3  :  in-. 

144,  3. 
-man,    pri.    nom.    sf.,    182,   1  h  ; 

stoms  in,  00  ;  p.  453,  9  Ae. 
man  as,  n.  mi)id.  83,  2. 
maniiv^t,  adv.  like  Mann,  179,  1. 
manus,  m.  a  name,  83,  2  e. 
-mant,  sec.  nom.  sf.,  1S2,  2  ;  stems 

in,  86. 
manth,  sl/alce,  pr.  stem,  134  E  3. 
mdntha,  m.  chnrmng  stkl-,  97,  2  a. 
manmasis,    adv.    each    as    he    is 

minded,  179,  1. 
mamaka,  poss.  prn.  my.  116  a. 
mamasatya,  n.  dispiite  us  to  oicner- 

ship,  synt.  ed.,  189  B  c. 
-maya,  see.  nom.  suffix,  182,  2. 
mariit,  m.  storm-god,  77,  1. 
raarutsakhi,  a.   having  the  Maruts 

as  friends,  99,  2  n. 
martyatra,     adv.    among    mortals, 

179,  3. 

marmrjenya,  int.  cjdv.  to  he  glori- 

fed,'l62,:]. 
malmalabhavant,     pt.     glittering; 

184  d.^ 
masmasa-kr,  crush,  184  d. 
-mas,  vocatives  in,  86. 
-masi,    1.    pi.    ind.    ending,   fre- 
quency of,  p.  125,  f.  n.  2. 
masmasa-kr,  crush,  184  d. 
mah,  a.  great,  81. 
mahdnt,    a.   greed,    85    a    (par.)  ; 

accentuation  of,  p.  459. 
mah^s,  a.  great,  83,  2  a  a. 
maha,  a.  great.  97,  2  a  ;  for  mahat- 

iu  Karmadharaj'as  and  Bahu- 

vrihis,  p.  275,  f.  n.  1. 
mahapaiikti,  a  metre,  p.  440  d. 
mahimdn,  m.  greatness,  90,  2. 
mah6,    inf.     to    be    glad,     167    a 

(p.  191). 
1.  ma,  measu7-e,  pr.  stem,  134  B 1 «  ; 

root  ao.  ipv.,  148,  5. 


2.  ma,  bellow,  pr.  stem,  134  B  3^  ; 
red.  ao.  inj.,  149,  3. 

3.  ma,  exchange,  pr.  stem,  133  B  1. 
ma,  f.  measure,  97,  2. 

ma,   end.    prs.    prn.   ace.   s.,   me, 

109  r»;  p.  4.52,  8  A  a. 
ma,   prohibitive   pel.   not,    128  c; 

180  ;    w.  inj.,  215  c  2  a;    never 

w.  ipv.,  215  b  a. 
makis,    prohibitive   prn.    pel.    vo 

one,  never,  113,  f.  n.  2  ;  180. 
makim,  prohiljitive  prn.  pel.  no 

one,  180. 
matdr,  f.  mother,  101,  2  (par.). 
matara,  f.  du.   mother  and  father, 

180  B  3  a. 
matarisvan,  m.  a  name,  90  a. 
matall,  m.  a  name,  100,  I  b. 
matftama,   f.   spv.    most   motherli/, 

103,  1  e. 
-mana,  sf.  of  mid.  pt.,  158. 
mamaka,  possessive  prn.,  116  a. 
mampasyi,    synt.    cd.,   a    plant, 

189  B  c. 
mavant,  prn.  der.  like  me,  118  c. 
mils,  m.  month,  83,  1. 
mas,  n.  flesh,  83,  1. 
-mi,  pri.  nom.  suffix,  182,  1  I>. 
mitradha,  adv.  in  a  friendh/  wai/, 

179,  1. 
mitra,  m.   du.  Mitra  and  Varuna, 

186  B  3  «  ;  193,  2  a. 
mitrasas,  m.  pi.  =  Mitra,  Variina, 

Aryainaii,  l93,  3  a. 
mithas,  adv.  wronghj,  179,  3. 
mithu,  adv.  wrongly,  179,  3  7. 
-min,  stems  in,  87. 
mih,  shed  watei;   ft.,   1.51  a  ;  inf., 

167  (p.  191). 
mih,  f.  mist,  81. 
-mi,  pri.  nom.  suffix,  182,  1  b. 
midhvams,  a.  bountiful,  157  b. 
mimamsitd,  pp.  of  des.  of  man, 

think,  160,  .8,  f.  n.  2. 
milhustama,    spv.    most    gracious, 

103, 'i  b. 
muc,  release,  pr.  stem,  133  C  1  ;  s 

ao.  opt.,  143,  4  ;  rt.  ao.,  148, 1  a; 

pre.,  148,  4  d. 
miid,  f.  joy,  77,  3  a. 
miir,  m.  destroyer,  82,  f.  n.  (>. 
murdhdn,  m.  head,  90. 


490 


VEDIC   INDEX 


1.  mr,  die,  rt.  ao.  inj.,  148,  3  ;  ps.. 
154  d. 

2.  mr,  crush,  i^r.  stem,  134  E  4  a. 
mrc,  injure,  s  ao.  op.,  143,  4. 
mrc,  f.  injur II,  79,  1. 

mrj,  wipe,  pi\  stem,  134,  1  6  ;  sa 
ao.,  141  a. 

mrd,  f.  clay,  11,  3  a. 

mrdh,  f.  conflict,  11,  4. 

mrs,  touch,  sa  ao,,  141  a. 

mrs,  neglect,  rt.  ao.  inj.,  148,  3. 

mrsmrsa-kr,  crush,  184  d. 

me,  ^■nc\.  prn.  dat.  gen.  s.  of 
aMm,  109  a  ;  p.  452,  8  A  re. 

medha,  m.  sacrifice,  accent  of,  in 
cds. ,  p.  454,  10. 

medh^s,  n.  wisdom,  83,  2  a  a. 

Maitrayani  Samhita,  accentua- 
tion of,  p.  450,'  3. 

-mna,  sec.  nora.  suffix,  182,  2. 

myaks,  he  situated,  rt.  ao.,  148,  1  d. 

Y,  interposed  in  ps.  ao.,  155 ;  in 

OS.,  168;  irr.,  4. 
ya,  rel.  prn.  who,  114  (par.). 
-ya,  gdv.  sf ,  162  ;  209,  1  ;  gd,  sf., 

210;   den.  sf.,  175;    sec.   nom. 

sf.,  182,  2. 
yams6nya,  ao.  gdv.    to  he  guided, 

162,  3. 
yakd,  rel.  prn.  loho,  114  & ;  117  «. 
ydkrt,  n.  liver,  77,  1. 
yaj,  sacrifice,  pr.  stem,  135,  4  ;  pf., 

137,  2c;    sa  ao.,  141  «  ;   s  ao., 

144,  5  ;  root  ao.,  148,  5  ;  pt.  ft., 

151  6  2. 

yajivams,    pf.    pt.    act.    of    yaj, 

sacrifice,  89  a. 
yajistha,  spv.  sacrificing  best,  103,  2. 
yajiyams,    cpv,    sacrificing     better, 

103,  2. 
yajnani,    a.    leading    the    sacrifice, 

100,  I  a. 
yajnapriya,  a.  sacrifice-loving,  100, 

Irt. 
yat,  stretch,  pf.,  137,  2  a. 
yatama,prn.  a.  trho{ofmany').  111  h; 

120  a. 
yatar^,  prn.  a,  who  {of  tiro),  117  b  ; 

120  a. 
yiti,  nm.  der.  as  many,  118  «. 


'    y^tkama,  a.  desiring  lohaf,  114  a, 
yatkarin,  a.  doing  tohat,  114  a. 
y&tra,  adv.,   synt.  use,   180  ;   215 

(p.  358)  ;  w,  op.,  216  (p.  366). 
ydtha,    adv.  as,    114   a  ;     179,    1  ; 

loses  accent,  p.  453.  8  B  a  ;  cj. 

in  order  that,  180  ;  216  (p.  365)  ; 

as,  so  that,  215  (p.  358). 
yad,  prn.  what,  114  ;   when,  so  that, 

w.    sb.,    215    (p.  357)  ;    when, 

178,  2  o  ;   ivhen,  if,   180 ;    if,  w, 

op.,  216  Cp.  363  7  1  ;    p.  365  e)  ; 

in  order  that,  216  (p.  364  a)  ;  that, 

w.  op.,  p.  364  /3  ;  w.  cond.  218 

(P;  368). 
yada,  adv.  when,  179,  3  ;   cj.,  180  ; 

w.  sb,,  215  (p.  359,  4) ;   as  soon 

as,  w.  op,,  216  (p.  366,  4  /3), 
y^di,  cj.  if,   irhen,  180;  if,  w.  sb., 

215  (p.  8.59,  5)  ;  if,  w.  op.,  216 

(p.  364\ 
yaddevatya,  a.  having  what  deity, 

114  rt. 
-yant,  prn.  sf.  expressing  quant itv, 

118  &. 
yam,   stretch,    pi',    stem,   133  A  2, 

135,  4;    pf,   137,  2  a;   139,  2; 

gd.,  165  ;  s  ao.,  144,  5;  root  ao. 

ipv.,  148,  5. 
yarhi,    adv.     ivhen,    w.    op.,    216 

(p.  366,  4  7). 
ydvistha,  spv.  youngest,  103,  2  a. 
yasas,  n.  glorn,  83,  2  a. 
ya,  low  grade  of,  4  a. 
ya,  cjo,  sis  aorist,  146. 
-ya,    gd.    sf.,    164 ;    how    added, 

164,  1. 
-yams,  cpv.  sf.,  103,  2  a  ;    stems 

in,  88. 
yad,  adv.    as  far  as,   178,  5  ;    cj., 

180 ;    so    long    as,    w.    sb.,   215 

fp.  359,  6) ;    in   so  far  as,  lirst 

member  of  synt.  cd.,  189  B  a. 
yadrs,  prn.  cd.  ichat  Z/Ae,114  a;  117. 
yadrsa,  ])vn.    cd.    what   like,    117, 

f.'n.  4. 
yavat,  cj.  as  long  as,  180. 
yavant,  prn.  der.  as  great,  118  c. 

1.  yu,  unite,  pr.  stem,  134,  1  a. 

2.  yu,  separate,  133  A  2  ;  134  B  3  a. 
-yu,  pri.  nom.  sf.,  182,  1  h  ;  stems 

in,  98  a. 


VEDIC   INDEX 


491 


yajtjoin,  pr,  system,  132  (pp.  136-   | 

7);    root  ao.    ipv.,  148,  5;    ft., 

151  «. 
yiij,  m.  companion,  79,  3  a. 
yudh,  fight,  root  ao.  ipv.,  148,  5  ; 

ds.  pr.  pt.,  85. 
yudh,  f.  figJit,  77,  4. 
yuva-,  pi's.  prn.  yon  firo,  109  b. 
yuvatf,  f.  young,  95  c. 
yuvan,  m.  youth,  90  a  ;   91,  4  ;    f. 

of,     95    c;    cpv.    of,    103,    2   a; 

accentuation  of,  p.  458,  c  1. 
yuvdm,  prn.  7je  tn-o,  109. 
yuvayu,  a.  desiring  you  two,  109  h. 
yuvavant,  prn.  der.  devoted  to  you 

tico,  118  c. 
yusma-,  prn.  yoic  (as  first  member 

of  a  cd.),  109  b. 
yusmayant,  prn.  der.  desiring  you, 

109  /;. 
yusmaka,  poss,  prn.  your,  116  b. 
yusmakam,  prn.  (G.  pi.)  of  you, 

116  h. 
yusmavant,  prn.  der.  belonging  to 

you,  118  c. 
yiiyam,  prs.  prn.  ye,  109. 
yeyajamahfi,  synt.  cd.,  189  B  6. 
yodhana,  pr.    pt.    of  yudh,  fight, 

158  a. 
yosan,  f.  woman,  90. 
yos,  n.  u-elfare,  83,  1. 

R,    original    final,    46,    f.    n.    1  ; 

49    d ;    before    r,    47  ;     two    r 

sounds  in  same  syllable  avoided, 

39,  f.  n.  4  ;  r  insei'ted  in  conj., 

134,  1  c  ;  stems  in,  82. 
ra,  low  grade  of,  4  a  (p.  4). 
-ra,  pri.  nom.  sf.,  182,  lb;   sec. 

nom.  sf.,  182,  2. 
raksds,  m.  demon,  83,  2  a. 
raghudru,  cd.   a.  running  swiftly, 

98  d.  _ 
raghuya,      inst.      adv.      rapidly, 

178,  3  a. 
ratnadhatama,  spv.  best  hestower  oj 

treasure,  103,  1. 
r^thaspdti,  m.  lord  of  the  car.  187 

(p^273,  f.  n.  .3). 
rathi,   m.    f.   charioteer,   100,    I   a 

(p.  86  ;  87,  par.). 


rathitama,     spv.     best     charioteer, 

103,  1. 
T&n,   m.  joy,  77,  5  ;    accentuation 

of,  p.  458,  c  1. 
-ran,  3.  pi.  ending  in  ppf.,  140,  6  ; 

in  root  ao.,  148,  1  ;  148,  1  h. 
randh,  make  subject,  a  ao.,  147  b. 
rabh,  grasp,  jif.,  137,  2  o. 
rdbhiyams,      cpv.      more     violent, 

103,  2  'a. 
ram,  rejoice,   red.  ao.  sb.,   149,  2, 

inj.,  149,  3  ;  sis.  ao.,  146. 
-ram,  3.  pi.  mid.  ending  in  ppf., 

140  b  (p.  158,  f.  n.  1)  ;   in  root 

ao.,  148,  1  ;  148,  1  h. 
rayintama,     spv.     a.     verij     rich, 

103,  1  rt. 
rarivams,  red.  pf.  pt.  of  ra,  89  a. 
rasmdn,  m.  rein,  90,  2. 
ra,  low  grade  of,  4  a  ;  5  b  a. 
ra,   give,    pr.    stem,    134   B    1   a  ; 

134  B  3  /3  ;   s  ao.  op.,    143,  4, 

ipv.,  143,  5 ;  root  ao.  ipv.,  148,  5. 
raj,  m.  king,  79,  3  «. 
raj  an,  m.  king,  90. 
ratri,  f.  night,  as  final  member  of 

cds.,  186  (p.  269),  f.  n.2;  189  A 

(p.  279),  f.  n.  3. 
radh,  succeed,  s  ao.,  144,  2;  red. 

ao.  sb.,  149,   2;    red.    ao.   inj., 

149,  3. 
rastranam,    G.    pi.,    65    (p.    48), 

f.'n.  1. 
rastrl,  m.  ruler,  100,  I  b. 
-ri,  pri.  nom.  sf.,  182,  1  b. 
ric,  leave,  s  ao.,  144,  5  ;  root  ao. 

inj.,  148,  3  ;  red.  pf.  pt.,  157  b  a. 
rip,  f.  deceit,  78,  1. 
ris,  hurt,  red.  ao.  op.,  149,  4. 
ris,  f.  injury,  80. 
rihdnt,  (pt.  i  a.  iveak,  85  a. 
ru,   cry,    pr.    stem,    134   vP-    142, 

f.  n.  1). 
-ru,  pri.  nom.  sf.,  182,  1  b. 
-ruk,  N.  of  -ruh,  a.  mounting,  81  a. 
rue,  shine,  red.  pf.  pt.,  157  b  a. 
rue,  f.  lustre,  79,  1. 
ruj,  break,  root  ao.  inj.,  148,  3. 
rud,  weep,  pr.  stem,  134  A  3  a. 
rudh,  obstruct,  s  ao.,  144,  5. 
rup,  f.  earth,  78,  1. 
riisant,  (pt.)  a.  brilliant,  85  a. 


492 


VEDIC   INDEX 


ruh,  ascend,  sa   ao.,    141    a ;    IfiS 

irr.  2,  f.  n.  1. 
ruh,  f .  sprout,  81 . 
rup&m,  ace.  adv.  Inform,  178,  2. 
-re,     3.    pi.    mid.     ending,     pr., 

134  C  4  7  ;  pf.,  136  a,  f.  n.  1. 
r«,  ni.  i.icealth,  102  ;  102, 1  (par.). 

-La,  sec.  nom.  suffix,  182,  2. 
laksrai,  f.  mark,  100,  I  a  (p.  88). 
Mghiyams,  cpv.  lightw,  103,  2  a. 
ISghu,  a.  light,  cpv.  of,  103,  2  a. 
labh,  take,  pf.,  137,  2  a. 
lip,  smear,  pr.  stem,  133  C  1. 
lup,  hreak,  pr,  stem,  133  C  1. 

Va,  low  grade  of,  4  a. 

-va,  pri.  nom.  sf.,  182,  1  h  ;  adA^. 

sf.,  179,  1. 
vagh£t,  m.  sacrificer,  85  h. 
vac,  sxieak,  pr.  stem,   135,  4  ;  pf., 

137,  2  c;    138,  8;  red.  ao.  irr., 

149  a  2,  op.,  149,  4,  ipv.,  149,  5 ; 

ps.,  154,  6 ;  ps.  ao.,  155. 
vane,  wove  crookedly,  ps.,  154,  5. 
vanij,  m.  trader,  79,  3  h. 
-vat,  sec.  nom.  sf.,  182,  2  ;  stems 

in,  77,  1  ;  adv.  sf.,  like,  179,  1  ; 

advs.  in,  197  A  5  ft  7  fp.  301). 
vad,  speak,  pr.  stem,  135,  4;  pf. , 

137,  2  c;  ps.,  154,  6. 
vadhar,  n.  n-eapon,  101,  1. 
van,   vin,    pr.  stem,   134  C  4  a  ; 

135.  4  ;  pf.,  137,  2  b  ;  139,  2  ;    s 

ao.  op.,  143,  4  ;    s  ao.,   144,  3 ; 

sis  ao.,  146 ;  root  ao.  ipv.,  148,  5 ; 

ds.,  171  (p.  200),  par. 
vHn,  n.("?)  irood,  77,  5 ;  accent,  p.  458 

('  1. 
-van,    pri.    nom.    sf.,    182,   1  h  ; 

nouns  in,  90,  1.  2;  fem.  of,  90 

(p.  59,  f.  n.  2) ;  95  c  ;  sec.  nom. 

sf.,  182,  2  ;  V.  in,  94.  f.  n.  4. 
vanad,  f.  longing,  77,  3  '*. 
vanarsfid,   a.   sittinc/   in   the   icood, 

49  d. 
-vant,  sec.  nom.  sf.,  182,  2  ;  stems 

in,    86  ;    pf.    pt.    act.    in,    161  ; 

205,  1  a. 
vap,  stren;  pr.  stem,   135,  4  ;  pf., 

137,  2  c. 


vdpustara,    cpv.    more    ironderfid, 

103, 'l. 
vapus,  n.  heauty,  83,  2  c. 
vam,  vomit,  pr.  stem,  134  A  3  a. 
-vam,  adv.  suffix,  179,  1. 
vayam,  prs.  prn.  ice,  109. 
vdyas,  n.  vigour,  83,  2  0.  a. 
vdra,  a.  choice,  spv.  of,  103,  2  a. 
v^raya,  dat.  adv.  according  to  7rish, 

178,  4. 
variman,  m.  width,  90,  2. 
varistha,  spv.  most  excellent,  103,  2  a  ; 

n-i'd'est,  103,  2  a. 
variyarns,  cpv.  wider,  103,  2  a. 
varjivams,    pf.    pt.    act.    of    vrj, 

tn-ist,  157  &. 
varsistha,  spv.  highest,  103,  2  I). 
varsiyams,  cpv.  higher,  103,  2  Z>. 
varsman,  n.  height,  103,  2  h,  f.  n.  5. 
vas,  desire,  pr.  stem.  134  A  2  rt. 
1    vas,  dn-ell,  pf.   137,2  c;   s  ao., 

144,  1;   s  ao.,   144,  2;    red.  pf. 

pt..  157  a. 

2.  vas,  H-ear,  pr.  stem,  134  A  3  /) ; 
135,  4  ;  pf,  139,  2;  cs.  ft., 
151  «  a. 

3.  vas,  s/ime,  pr.  stem,  133  C  2 ; 
s  ao.,  144, 1  ;  s  ao.,  144,  5  ;  root 
ao.,  148,  1  d. 

vas,  m.  (?)  abode,  83,  1. 

vas,  encl.  prs.  prn.  A.D.G.  pi.  you, 

\m  a;  p.  452,  8  A  a. 
-vas,  V.  in,  86 ;  89  ;  90,  3 ;  94,  3, 

f.  n.  3. 
vasistha,  spv.  best,  103,  2  a. 
vasu,  n.  irealth,  98  a;  spv.  of,  best, 

103,  2  a. 
vasuvfin,  a.  bestowing  icealth,  90,  3. 
vdstos,  gen.  adv.    in  the  moryiing, 

178,  6  ;  202  D  3  a. 
vasyams,  c^w.  belter,  103,  2  a. 
vah,  can  J/,  pr.  stem,  135,  4  ;  pf. , 

137,  2  c;  s  ao,,   144,  2;  144,  5: 

root  ao.  ipv.,  148,  5  ;  p.s.,  154,  6; 

ps.  sli.,  154  b  ;  ps.  ao.,  155  a  1. 
vahat,  f.  stream,  85  b. 
va,  low  grade  of,  5  6  a. 
va,  weave,  pr.  stem,  133  B  1. 
va,  encl.  cj.  or,  180  ;  p.  452,  8  A  b. 
-vams,  sf.    of  red.  pf.   pt.,    157  ; 

pf.  pt.  in,  89  (par.). 


g 


VEDIC   INDEX 


493 


va3,  f.  spvcc/i,  79,  1. 

-vace,  inf.  to  apeak,  167  a  (p.  191). 

Vajasaneyi    Sarahita,    how     ac- 

uented,  p.  449. 
-vat,  N.   sing,   of  -vah,  canyiny, 

si  a. 
vatikrta,  u.  a  disease,  184  d  a. 
vam,  prs.  prn.  du.    ice  hvo,   109  ; 

p.  452,  S  A  a. 
vara,  end.  prs.  prn.,  A.  D.  G.  du., 

ijuu  Ifco,  109  a. 
v5,r,  m.  protector,  82,  f.  n.  0, 
var,  n.  axitcr,  82,  f.  n.  7. 
varkary^,  a.  producing  water,  49  d. 
vavd,  pel.  certainlij,  180. 
vas,  bellow,  red.  ao.,  149,  1. 
vi,  ni.  bird,  99,  3«;  accent,  p.  458, 

cl. 
vimsati,  nm.  tiventy,  104  ;    106  rf 

(par.). 
vie,  sift,  red.  pf.  pt.,  15 <  b  a. 
vij,  tremble,  root  ao.  inj.,  148,  3. 
vjj,  f.  (?)  stake,  79,  3  a. 
vitaram,  adv.  more  toidely,  178,  2. 

1.  vid,  Anoa',  unred.  pf.,  139,  3  ; 
ao.  ps.,  155. 

2.  vid,  find,  pr.  stem,  133  C  1  ; 
134  A  4  c  a  ;  a  ao.,  147, 1  (par. )  ; 
a  ao.  op.,  147,  4  (par.). 

vid,  f.  knowledge,  77,  3  a. 
vidana,  and  vidana,  pr.  pt.  mid. 

of  vid,  find,  158  a. 
vidustara,  cpv.  wiser,  103,  1  b. 
vidvams,  pf.  pt.  knowing,  157  b. 
vidhartf,  a.  meting  out,  101,  2  b. 
-vidhe,  inf.  to  pierce,  167  a  (p.  191). 
•vin,  sec.  nom.  sf.,  182,  2  ;  stems 

in,  87. 
vina,  prp.  without,  w.  ace,  197  c  a 

(p.  303). 
vip,  f.  rod,  78,  1  ;  accent,  p.  458, 

cl. 
vipas,  f.  a  river,  63  b,  f.  n.  2  ;  79,  4. 
viprus,  f.  dro2J,  80. 
vibhavas,  v.  radiant,  90,  3. 
vibhii,  a.  eminent,  100,  II  b. 
vibhvan,  a.  far-reaching,  90,  1  a. 
viraj,    f.  stanza  of  three  verses, 

p.  441,  5  a. 
vivisivams,   red.   pf.    pt.    of  vis, 

enter,  89  a  ;  157  a. 


vis,  f.  settlement,  63  b,  t.  n.  2  ;  79,  4 
(par.). 

visivams,  unred.  pf.  pt.  of  vis, 
enter,  157  b. 

visevise,  itv.  cd.  in  ecerg  house, 
189  C  a. 

vispdti,  m.  lord  of  the  house,  49  a. 

visva,  prn.  a.  all,  120  b  (par.)  ; 
accent  in  cds.,  p.  454,  lO. 

visvatra,  adv.  ecery where,  179,  3. 

visvatha,  adv.  in  every  way,  179,  1. 

visvadanim,  adv.  always,  179,  3  ti. 

visv^dha,  adv.  in  every  way,  179,  1. 

visvaha,  adv.  always,  179,  1. 

vistdp,  f.  summit,  78,  1. 

visvaiic,  a.  all-pervading,  93  a. 

visarjaniya,  m.  spirant.  'S  g ;  14  ; 
15;  27;  31;  32;  37;  43;  43,3, 
f.  n.  4  ;  44  ;  48  ;  49  c  ;  76  ; 
sandhi  of  final,  43  ;  44  ;  some- 
times becomes  s  before  gutturals 
and  labials,  43,  2  a ;  dropped, 
43,  3a;  45,  1  ;  45,  2  a ;  48 ; 
changed  to  r,  44  ;  46. 

vispds,  m.  spy,  79,  4. 

VI,  m.  receiver,  100,  I  a. 

vir^,  m.  hero,  accent  of,  in  com- 
i:)ounds,  p.  454,  10. 

1.  vr,  cover,  pr.  stem,  134  C  3  ; 
root  ao.,  148,  1  d,  inj.,  148,  3, 
ipv.,  148,  5,  pt.,  148,  6  ;  red.  ao., 
149,  1 ;  cs.  ft.,  151  a  a. 

2.  vr,  choose,  root  ao.  inj.,  148,  3. 
vrj,  'ticist,  sa  ao.,  141  a;  root  ao., 

'148,  1  d,  op.,  148,  4. 
vrt,  t^lrn,  ft.,  151  a ;  red.  pf.  pt., 

"157. 
vrt,  f.  host,  77,  1. 

vrtratara,  cjjv.  a  worse  Vrtra,  103,  1. 
vrtrahan,  a.  Vrtra-slaying,  92. 
vrddha,   pp.   grown    up,    cpv.    of, 

'103,2  b. 
vf  ddhi,  f.  strong  grade  of  vowels, 
•"oa;  5aa;  17;  17a;  19  6;  22; 
23   (for  Guna) ;    128  b  ;   in  pr. 
stem,  134, 1  a  (irr.)  ;  in  pf.  stem, 
136,  2.  3  ;   in  s  ao.,  143,  1  ;   in 
is  ao.,  145,  1  ;  in  ao.  ps.,  155  ; 
iA  gdv.,  162,  lb;  168,  1  c. 
vrdh,  grow,  red.  ao.,  149,  1. 
vrdli,  f.  prosperity,  11,  4  ;  a.  strength- 
ening, 11,  4. 


494 


VEDIC   INDEX 


vrsanasva,  Bv.  cd.  haviny  slalUons 

as  steeds,  52  «. 
vrsan,  in.  bull,  90. 
vrsantama,      spv.      most      manly, 

'ios,  1  «. 
vedi,  f.  altar,  loe.  of,  98  (p.  81\ 

f.  1).  6. 
vedhas,  m.  ordainer,  83,  2  a  a. 
veh^t,  f.  barren  coic,  85  6. 
vd.i,  emphasizing  pel.  indeed,  180. 
vaitaliya,  n.  a  metre,   p.  436,  f. 

n.  2. 
volhave,  dat.  inf.  io  carry,  167, 1  i>  4. 
vyac,  extend,  pr.  stem,   134  B  2  : 

135,  4. 
vya^dh,  2nerce,  pr.  stem,  133  B  1. 
vya,  envelope,  pr.  stem,   133  B  1  ; 

a  ao.,  147  a  1. 
vyatta,    opened,     pp.    of    vi-a-da, 

160,  2  6. 
vrasc,  cut,  pr.  stem,  133  C  2. 
-vraska,  a.  cutting,  133  C  2,  f.  n.  2. 
vra,  f.  troop,  97,  2. 
vrSdhantama,     spv.     being      most 

mighty,  103,  1  h.    ■ 
vris,  f.  finger,  79,  4. 

S,  stems  in,  79,  4. 

-sa,  sec.  nom.  suffix,  182,  2. 

sams,  praise,  ps.,  154,  5. 

sak,  be  able,  ])t.,  137,  2  a  ;  I'oot  ao. 
jpv.,  148,  5. 

sakrt,  n.  excrement,  77,  1. 

sakvarij    f.    a   metre,   p.   440  d  ;^ 
p.  441,  f.  n.  6. 

saci,  f.  might,  100,  I  b. 

sat&kratu,     a.    having    a    hundred 
powers,  98  (p.  82),  f.  n.  6. 

satatauia,  ord.  hundredth,  107. 

sitadavan,  a.  giving  a  hundredfold, 

^  90. 

Satapatha  Brahmana,  accentua- 
tion of,  p.  448,  1  ;  p.  451,  5. 

sat&m,  nm.  «  hundred,  104  ;    106  d 
Vimr.) ;  concord  of,  194  B  1  ?*. 

sataidpS,  adv.  by  hundreds,  179,  1. 

satruha,  a.  slaying  enemies,  97,  3. 

sdnais,  adv.  slowly,  178,  3  b. 

sap,  curse,  pi.,  137,  2  a. 

sam,  n.  happiness,  78,  3. 

s^yana,   i^r.    pt.    mid.    of  si,   lie, 
158  a. 


sayutra,  adv.  on  a  couch,  179,  3. 

sarad,  f.  autumn,  77,  3  b. 

sal,  ij.  claj} !  181. 

sasayan^,  pf.  pt.  mid.  of  si,  lie, 

159  a. 
sasiyams,      cpv.      more      frequent, 

103,  2  a. 
sasvattama,     spv.    most    coitslant, 

103,  1. 
sasvadha,  adv.   again   and   again, 

179,  1. 
sasvant,  a.  constant,  103,  2  a. 
-sas,  adv.  sf.  w.  distributive  sense, 

179,  1. 
sa,  sharpen,  pr.  stem,   134  B  1  «  ; 

134  B  3  a. 
sas,  order,  pr.  stem,   134  A  4  a;  a 

ao.,  147  a  1. 
sas,  m.  ruler,  83,  1. 
sasat,    i:>r.    pt,    instructing,    85  b ; 

156  a. 
siras,  n.  Iiead,  90,  1  a. 
sista,  pp.  of  sas,  order.  160,  2  b. 
siksanara,  a.  helping  men,  189  A  2  i*. 
si,  lie,  pr.  stem,  134, 1  c- ;  134  A  4  c  a ; 

pf.,  139,  7  (f.  n.  ri. 
sirsan,  n.  head,  90,  1. 
sue,   shine,   red.   pf.    pt.,    157  b  a  ; 

red.  ao.  inj.,  149,  3. 
siic,  f .  flame,  79,  1 . 
siici,  a.  bright,  98  (par.). 
subh,  shine,    pr.    stem,    183  C  1 ; 

root  ao.  pt.,  148,  6. 
subh,  f.  splendour,  78,  2. 
sii,  swell,  red.  pf.  pt.,  157  b  a. 
socis,  n.  glow,  83,  2  b. 
scandr^,  a.  bright,  50  a. 
snath,  pierce,  pr.  stem,  131  A  3  fc  ; 

red.  ao.,  149,  1. 
srath,  slacken,  red.  ao.  ipv.,  195,  5. 
srad,     heart,    compounded    with 

verbs,  184  b. 
sraddhe,  inf.  to  trust,  167,  1,  f.  n.  2 

(p.  191). 
sram,  be  iceary,  pr,  stem,  133  B  3. 
sri,  resort,  root  ao,   inj.,    148,  3  ; 
red.  ao.,  149,  1  ;   ps.  ao.,  155  ; 
cs.,  168  c,  f.  n.  1  (p.  196). 
sri,  f.  glory,  100,  I  a. 
sru,  hear,  jir.  stem,  134  C  3  ;    root 

ao.  ipv,,  148,  5  ;  ps.  ao.,  155. 
srut,  a.  hearing,  77,  1. 


VEDIC   INDEX 


495 


srenisas,  adv.  in  rous,  179,  1. 
sreyams,  cpv.  hetfcr,  103,  2  a. 
srdstha,  sjiv.  best,  103,  2  a  ;  lb9,  1  b. 
sresthatania,  double  i5])v.,  103,  1  c. 
sloka,  m.  ;i  metre,  p.  439,  3  b  a. 
sv^n.  111.  duij,  90  a  ;  91,  3  ;  accen- 

tiiatioii  (if,  J).  458,  c  1. 
svasru,  f.  mother- in-lair,  100,  II  h,  a, 

f.  n.  1. 
svas,  bloic,  pr.  stem,  134  A  3  a. 
svds,  adv.  to-morroic,  179,  3. 
svit,  he  bright,  s  ao..  144,  S. 

S,  stems  ill,  SO. 

sdt,  iim.  six,  65  c,  f.  11.  2  (p.  43). 

sas,  iim.  six,  104  ;  lOG  a  (par.). 

sasti,  nm.  s/x/j/,  104. 

.sastha,  ord.  sixth,  107, 

sodasa,    nm.    sixteen,   104  ;    106  c 

(par.  I. 
sodha,  nm.  adv.  in  six  wai/s,  108  b. 

S,  changed  to  t,  83,  la;  89 ; 
171,  6  (ds.);  144.  1  (s  ao.) ;  loss 
of,  133  B  1,  144,  2  a,  in  s  ao., 
144,  6,  between  consonants, 
148,  Ig:  of  N.  in  cds.,  189,  1  6: 
adv.  sf.,  179,  1  ;  ao.,  142;  143; 
stems  in,  83. 

sa,  dem.  prn.,  110 ;  Sandhi  of, 
48  ;  pleonastic  formulaic  use  of, 
180. 

•sa,  sf.  of  ao.,  141  o ;  of  ds., 
169,  1.2;  pri.  noin.  sf.,  182,  1  b. 

saka,  dem.  prn.,  that  little,  117  a. 

sakft,  nm.  adv.  once,  108  «  ;  w. 
gen.,  202  D  3. 

sakthi,  n,  thigh,  99,  4. 

sdksant,  s  ao.  act.  pt.  of  sah, 
overcome,  85  ;  156  a. 

sakha  foi-  sd.klii,  in  cds.,  188,  2 
,p.  275),  f.  n.  2;  189,  4  rf. 

sakhi,  m.  frie^id,  99,  2  ;  in  Bahu- 
vrihis  and  Karmadliarayas, 
188,  4  d,  f.  11.  1  ;  in  governing 
cds.,  189  A  2  «  (p.  280),  f.  n.  3. 

sac,  folloiv,  i3i\  stem,  133  A  3  a ; 
134B3/3;  134  B3;  pf.,  137,2a; 
137,  2b;  s  ao.  op.,  143,  4  ;  root 
ao.  ijDV,,  148,  5 ;  red,  pf.  i^t., 
157  a. 

saca;  prp.  with,  w.  loc,  177,  5. 


sajosas,  a.  united,  88,  2  a  a. 
saiij,  hang,  pr.  stem,  133  A  4. 
satobrhati,  f.  a  metre,  )).  444,  3  c. 
satydrm,  adv.  tralg,  178,  2. 
satra,  adv.  in  one  place,  179,  3. 
sad,  sit,  pr.  stem,  133  A  3  «  ;  pf., 

137,    2  a,   f.    n.   2  ;   a  ao.  ipv., 

147,  5;  red.  ao.,  149,  1. 
sddam,  adv.  ahcags,  179,  3. 
s^da,  adv.  alicays,  179,  3. 
sadivas,  adv.  to-daij,  179,  3. 
sadyds,  adv.  to-day,  179,  3, 
sadha-,  adv.  together,  179, 1  (p.  212). 
sadhryaiic,     a.     converging,     93    b 

(p.  74),  f,  n,  1, 
san,    gain,    pr,    stem,    134  C  4  a  ; 

red,  pf.  pt.,  157. 
-san,   loc.  inf.  of  stems  in,   167, 

4  c. 
sana,  a.  old,  cpv.  of,  103,  2  «. 
sand.j,  a.  old,  79,  8  I. 
sanat,  abl.  adv.//oj»  of  old,  178,  5. 
-sani,  loc.  inf.  in,  211,  4, 
sanitur,  prp.  ajmrt  from,  w.  ace, 

177,  1  ;  197  B  c. 
sauutar,    pri^,  far  from,    w,  abl., 

177,  3. 
s^nt,  pr.  pt.  of  as,  be,  85, 
samtaram,  ace.  adv.  closer  togetltcr, 

197  A  5  &  )3. 
samnam,  f.  favour,  78,  3. 
sdnyams,  cpv.  older,  88  ;  103,  2  a. 
sap,  serve,  pf.,  137,  2  a  ;    red.  ao. 

inj.,  149,  3. 
sapar^nya,  den,  gdv.  to  be  adored, 

162,  3. 
saptd,  nm.  seven,  104  ;  106  c  (par.), 
saptati,  nm.  seventtj,  104. 
saptath^,  ord.  seventh,  107. 
saptadasa,     nm.    seventeen,     104  ; 

106  c.  ^ 
saptadha,  adv.  in  seven  ivays,  108  h. 
saptamd,  ord.  seventh,  107. 
sama,  indef.  prn.  any,  119  a  (par.); 

p.  452,  8  A  a. 
samaha,  adv.  in  some  ivuy  or  other, 

179,  1  ;  p.  452,  8  A  &. 
samand,,  a.  similar,  120  c  2  (p.  117). 
samudri,  f.  oceanic,  100,  I  a  (p.  86), 

f.  n.  1. 
samprasarana,  m.  distraction,  5  b ; 

17a,  f.  n.2;  69  c,  f.  n.  2  ;  89  ;  91, 


4D(J 


VEDIC   INDEX 


3.  i.  5  ;  'M,  2  ;  "JD,  5,  f.  a.  1  ;  pr. 

stem,  133  B  1 ;  133  C  2,  f.  n.  1 ; 

13i  A  2  « ;    134  B  2  ;    134  E  2  ; 

135,4;  137,  2a,  f.  n.  1;  137,2c; 

139,2;  154,6;  1(50,2;  160,  3«; 

inf.,   167,   1,   f.   n.   3;  cs.,    16S, 

iiT.,  5. 
sainyd.Sc,  a.  luiitcd,  93  a  ;   w.  ace, 

197. 
samraj,  in.  sovereign  ruler,  49  b. 
sar^h,  f.  (?)  bee,  81. 
sarit,  f.  stream,  77,  1. 
sarva,  prii.  a.  ivhole,  120  b  (par.). 
sarvada,  adv.  always,  179,  3. 
sarvahut,     a.     offerituj    completely, 

77,  1. 
sascat,  pr.  pt.  of  sac,  follow,  85  b, 

f.  a.  5, 
sascdrt,  in.  pursuer,  85  b. 
sah,    overcome,    140,  3a;    s.    ao., 

144,3;  op.,  143,  4;  ipv.,143, 5; 

pt.,  143,  6  ;  jjf.  i^rc,  150  a  ;  ft., 

151  c  ;  s  ao.  pt.  act.,  156  a. 
s&h,  in.  conqueror,  81  ;  a.  victorious, 

81  a  (par.), 
sahd,  prp.  ?ti7/t,  w.   inst.,  177,  2  ; 

adv  ,  179,  1. 
sahaatama,    spv.    most    victorious, 

103,  1  b. 
sdihasa,  inst.  a.dv.  forciblij,  178,  3. 
sahisra,  n.  thousand,  104  ;    106  d 

Qjar.)  ;  concord  of,  194  B  1  6. 
sahasratamfi,  ord.  thousandth,  107 

(p.  102),  f.  a.  2. 
sahasradha,  am.  adv.  in  a  thousand 

I  rays,  108  b, 
saliasrasas,     adv.     by     thousands, 

179,  1. 
sahyams,  cpv.  stronger,  103,  2  a. 
sa,  biiut,  root  ao.  ipv. ,  148,  5. 
sakam,  prp.  with,  w.  inst.,  177,  2. 
saksat,  abl.  adv.  visibly,  178,  5. 
-sac,  a.  accompanying,  79  (p.  54\ 

f.  a.  1. 
sadh,  succeed,  red.  ao.  sb.,  149,  2  ; 

inj.,  149,  3. 
sadhistha,  spv.  straightest,  103,  2  a. 
sadhu,  a.  straight,  spv.  of,  103,  2  a. 
sadhuya,      inst.      adv.      straight, 

178,  3  b. 
sanu,  m.   a.   summit,    98  (p.  81), 

f.  n.  13  ;  98  a. 


Samaveda,        acceatuatioa       of, 

p.  450,  4. 
sayfim,  adv.  in  the  evening,  178,  2. 
sayampratar,     adv.    evening    and 

inoniing,  accoatiuitioa,  p.  475  e  a. 
sahvams,  uared.  jif.  pt.  act.,  2^re- 

vailing,  157  b. 
-si,     2.     s.     iad.     cadiiig  =  ipv., 

215  h  0. 
simhi,  f.  lioness,  100,  I  a  (p.  88). 
sic,  sprinkle,  pr.  stem,  133  C  1. 
sic,  f.  hem  of  a  garmeid,  79,  1. 
sima,  dem.  pra.,  100,  3  a. 
siri,  m.  weaver,  110,  I  b. 
sis  aorist,  142  ;  146. 
sidant,  \)v.  pt.  of  sad,  sit,  85. 
sim,  end.  prn.  pel.,  180  ;  i>.  452, 

8  A.  a. 
su,  impel,  pr.  stem,  134.  1  a  (p.  142). 
su,  press,   root  ao.   part.,  148,  6  ; 

pr.  pt.,  85. 
su,  su,  adv.  welt,  180  ;  ia  Bv,  cds., 

p.  455,  10  c  a. 
sudas,  a.  liberal,  83,  1. 
sudhi,  a.  wise,  100,  1  a,  f.  a.  4. 
supu,  a.  clarifying  well,  98  d. 
sumdd,  prp.  ivith,  w.  inst.,  177,  2. 
sumedhas,  a.  intelligent,  83,  2  a  a. 
surabhintara,  cpv.,  103,  1  a. 
suradhas,  a.  bountiful,  83,  2  a  a. 
suvastu,  f.  a  river,  98  a. 
su,    bring  forth,    pf.,    139,    7  ;    it., 

151  c ;  ps.  iaj.,  154  b. 
su,  m.  begetter,  100,  II  a. 
sud,  put  in   order,   red.    ao.    ipv., 

195,  5. 
sv,Jtow,  a  ao.,  147  c ;  ft.,  151  a. 
srj,  emit,  s  aorist,  144,  4.  5. 
sobhari,  m.  a  aaaie,  100,  I  b. 
skand,  leap,  root  ao. ,  148,  1  d. 
skambh,  make  firm,  134  E  3. 
sku,    tear,     pr.    stem,     134,     1    a 

(p.  142),  f.  n.  1. 
Stan,  thunder,  pr.  stem,  134  A  3  b. 
stambh,  pirop,  pr.  stem,  134  E  3.  4  , 

red.  pf.  pt.,  157. 
stdr,  m.  star,  82,  f.  a.  5 ;  82  6. 
stavanfi,    pr.    pt.    mid.    of    stu, 

praise,  158  a. 
stu,  praise,  pr.  stem,   134,  lea; 

pf.,  138,  5  ;  s  ao.,  143, 1.  2  (par.)  ; 
ft.  pt.,  151  b  2  ;  ps.  ao.,  155. 


VEDIC   INDEX 


497 


stubh,  f.  praise,  78,  2. 

str,  star,  accentuation  of,  p.  458, 

c  1. 
str,  slrew,  ps.,  154,  3,  f.  n.  1  ;  s  ao. 

op.,  143,  4. 
stri,  f.  iroman,  100,  Ih  B  (p.  88). 
stha,  stand,  pr.  stem,   133  A  8  a  ; 

134  B  3  /3 ;  a  ao.,  147  a  1  ;  I'oot 

ao.,  148,  1  a  (par.),  op.,  148,  4, 

pt.,  148,  6  ;  red.  pf.  pt.,  157. 
stha,  a.  standing,  97,  2. 
sthatf,  a.  stationary,  101,  2  b. 
sthapaya,  cs.  of  stha,  stand:  red. 

ao  ,  149  a  3. 
sthira,  a  firm,  cpv.  of,  103,  2  b. 
sth6yams,     cpv,     most     steadjasf, 

103,  2  a. 
snu,  summit,  accent,  p.  458,  c  1. 
snu,    rfis<i7,    pr.    stem,    134,    1  a 

(p.  142),  f.  n.  1. 
-snu,  pri.  nom.  sf.,  182,  1  b. 
spas,  see,  pr.  stem,   133  B  1  ;    pr. 

pt.,  85. 
sp&s,  m.  spy,  63  6,  f.  n.  2  ;  79,  4. 
spr,  (rin,  root  ao.,  148,  1  d. 
-sprk,  N.  of  -sprs,  tuuching,  81  a. 
sprdh,  f.  battle,  77,  4. 
.sprs,  touch,  sa  ao.,  141  a  ;  red.  ao. 

sb.,  149,  2;  inj.,  149,  3. 
sma,  eucl.  emphasizing  pel.,  180  ; 

w.  pura  and  pr. ,  212  A  2  &  ; 

p.  452,  8Ab. 
sma,  prn.  element,  110. 
sradd,  prp.  icith,  with  inst.,  177,  2. 
smr,  remember,  ps.,  154,  4,  f.  n.  1. 
sya,  dem.   prn.    that,    Sandhi   of, 

48. 
-sya,  ft.  suffix,  151. 
-syade,  inf.  tojiow,  167  a  (p.  191). 
syand,  flow,   pf.,    135,  4  ;    s    ao., 

144,  5  ;  red.  ao.,  149,  1. 
syu,  f.  thread,  100,  II  a. 
Hvams,  fall,  a  ao.,  147  b  ■    red.  ao., 

149,  1. 
srd.j,  f.  garland,  79,  3  a. 
sravat,  f.  stream,  85  b. 
sras,  2.  s.  s  ao.  of  srj,  emit,  141,  2. 
sridh,  f./oc,  77,  4.  ' 
srue,  f.  ladle,  79,  1. 
srii,  f.  stream,  100,  II  «. 
sv6.,  po.ss.  prn.  own,  115  6,  c  (par.) ; 

116  c;  120  c  2. 


svad,  SH-eeten,  red.  ao.  inj.,  149,  3. 

svan,  a.  sounding,  11,  5. 

svap,  sleep,  pr.  stem,  134  A3  a; 

pf.,   135,  4;    1.37.  2  c;   pf.  pt., 

157  ;  red.  ao.,  149,  1. 
svayam,  ref.  i)rn. ,  115  a, 
svdyukta,  Tp.  cd.  self-yoked,  115  ca, 
svar,  sound,  s  ao. ,  144,  5. 
svar,   n,   tight,  82,   f.    n.  7  ;  82  c ; 

accentuation  of,  p.  458,  c  1. 
svarabhakti,  f.  vowel  element,  15  d. 
svarita,  m.  (encWiic)  falling  accent, 

p.    448,     1  ;     p.   451,    6 ;     how 

marked,   p.  449,    2  ;  p.  450,  3.  4. 
svarcaksas,    ;i.    brilliant    as    light, 

49  d. 
svarpati,  m.  lord  of  heaven,  49  d. 
svaria,  a.  winning  light,  49  d, 
svarsati,  f.  acquisition  of  light,  49  d. 
svasocis,  a.  setf-radiant,  83,  2  b. 
svasr,  f.  sister,  101,  1. 
svadistha,  sjjv.  sweetest,  103,  2  P. 
svadiyams,  cpv.  sweeter,  103,  2  /3. 
svadu,  a.  sweet,  cpv.  and  spv.  of, 

103,  2  j8. 
Sivid,  end.  emphasizing  pel.,  180  ; 

p.  452,  8  A  &. 


H  treated  like  aspirate  cerebral, 

69  c  ;  like  dh,  69  d;  reverts  to 

guttural,  92  (p.  72)  f.n.  1,  in  pr. 

stem,  134  A  2  c,  1.58  a  ;  stems  in, 

81. 
ha,  end.  emphasizing  pel.,  180; 

p.  452,  S  Kb  ;  w.  piira  and  pr., 

212  A  2  ba. 
-ha,  a.  slaying,  97,  3. 
-ha,  adv.  suffix,  179,  1  p. 
han,   slay,   pr.   stem,    134,    lea; 

134  A  2  c  ;    134  B  3  ;3  ;    pf., 

137,  2  6 ;   139,  4  ;   pr.  pt.  act., 

156  a  ;  gd.,  165  a. 
-han,  a.  slaying,  77,  5  ;  92. 
hanta,  ij.  come!  180;  181. 
hay6,  ij.  coj)(e .'  181. 
havismant,  a.  offering  an  oblation, 

86.' 
has,  laugh,  pr.  .stem,  134  B  3. 
hasta,  m.  hand,  compounded  w. 

gd.,  184  c. 
hastin,  a.  having  hands,  87  (par.). 


i8ia 


Kk 


498 


VEDIC   INDEX 


ha,  go  away,  pr.  stem,  134  B  1  a  ; 

sao.,144,2.  5;  146. 
hi,    cj.   for,    180  ;    accents   verb. 

p.  467,  19  B. 
-hi,   ending    of    2.    s.    ipv.    act,, 

134  C  4  5. 
hims,  injure,  pr.  stem,  134  D  1. 
hiri,  ij.  compounded  with  kr,  do, 

184  rf. 
hitd,  pp.  of  dha,  put,  160,  2  a. 
hinv,  impel,  pi:  stem,  133  A  3  f» ; 

134  C  4  ^. 
him,  n.  cold,  78,  3. 
hlranyavasimattama,     spv.     best 

wielder  of  the  golden  axe,  103,  1. 
hiruk,  ij.  cnvay !  181. 
hid,  he  angry,  red.  no.,  149,  1. 
hu,  sacrifice,  pr.  stem,  134  B  3  n. 
huruk,  ij.  aivay,  181. 


hu,  ccdl,  rt.  ao.  inj.,   148,3;  ps., 

154  a  (par.),  ipv.,   1516  (,P«'»i'.). 

impf.,  154  c. 
hr,  take,  s  ao.,  144,  5. 
hrttas,  adv. //-om  the  heart,  179,  2. 
hfd,  n.  heart,  77,  3  o. 
hai,  V].  ho  '.   181. 
hyas,  adv.  yesterday,  179,  3. 
hvar,  he  crooked,  pr.  stem,  134  B  2  ; 

s  ao.,  144,  2  ;  red.  ao.  inj.,  149,3. 
hva,  ccdl,  pr.  .stem,  133  B  1  ;  a  ao., 

147  a  1. 

L  =  d,  3  6  7  (p.  3),  f.  n.  1  ;  11  rt  a  ; 
■  15;  2  d;  15,  2i. 

Lh  =  dh,  3  &  7  (p.  3),  f.  n.  1 ;  15,  2  d; 
15,  2  i ;  produces  lengtli  )>y 
position,  p.  437,  a  3. 


GENERAL  INDEX 

Tlift  abbreviations  occurring  in  this  index  liave  been   explained  at 
tlie  beginning  of  Appendix  I  and  of  the  Vedlc  Index. 
The  figures  refer  to  paragraphs  unless  pages  are  specified. 


Ablative,  syntactical  use  of,  201  ; 
w.  verbs,  201  A  1  ;  w.  substan- 
tives, 201  A  2  ;  w.  adjectives, 
201 A  3  ;  w.  numerals,  201  A  3  c  ; 
w.  adverbs,  201  A  4  ;  w.  pre- 
positions, 176  a,  b  •  m,  3  ; 
expresses  the  reason,  201  b. 

Abl.-gen.  inf.,  167,  3  (p.  194); 
svnt.  use  of,  211,  3. 

Absolute  eases,  205  :  loc,  205,  1  ; 
gen,,  205,  2. 

Accent,  16  ;  71  «  ;  77,  5,  f.  n.  1 
82  h,    f.    n,   1  ;    82  c,   f.   n.    2 
83,  1  f) ;   85  ;   89  ;   93  a,  f.  n.  1 
97,  2.  f.  n.  2  (p.  79)  ;   100,  1  a 
100,    1    b.    f.    n.    3;     100,    II 
100,    II   6;     102,    2,    f.    n.    1 
103, 1.  2  (f.  n.  1-3)  ;  101,  f.  n.  6 
104  a,  b;  106;    107  ;   125,  1.  2 
126  o  ;    127,  1.  2  ;    128  ;    131 
134,  1  c ;    134  A  4  &  (f.  n.  1) 
136  ;   141.  1  (f.  n.  3)  ;  148,  5 
154;     155;     158   a  ;     159   a   4 
162,  4  ;    164  ;    167,   1  b,  f.  n.  1 
169;  172;  175;  175  A  2,  f.  n.  1 
189  A,  f.  n.  2  ;  195  B  6  ;  double 
167  b  6  ;    185,  f.  n.  1  ;   186  A  1 
p.  452,  7  ;    p.  456,  2   ^  ;    shift 
of,  5  ;    72  «  ;    85  b  ;    100,  I  b, 
f.  n.  3  and  p.  87:    112,  f.  n.  4  ; 
112  7,  f.  n.  1  ;  189  ;  199  A  6  a  ; 
p.  454,  10 ;  p.  458,  lie;   p.  464, 
1 6 ;  pp.  448  -69  ;  musical,  p.  436 ; 
p.  448, 1  ;  methods  of  marking, 
App.  Ill,  2-5;  of  single  words, 
p.  451,  6 ;    Greek,    p.   451,    6  ;    1 

Kk 


lack  of,  p.  452,  8 ;  in  dec, 
p.  457,  11  a  ;  p.  475,  11  a  ;  in 
the  sentence,  p.  464, 18  ;  verbal, 
pp.  459-62  ;  of  augmented 
tenses,  p.  459,  12  a  ;  of  pr. 
system,  p.  459,  12  b  ;  p.  460, 
pf.  12  c. 

Accented  particles,  position  of, 
191  i. 

Accusative,  syntactical  use  of, 
197  A  ;  w.  verbal  nouns,  197  B  ; 
w.  adjectives,  197  B a, /3  (p.  302); 
w.  adverbs,  p.  303,  iS  ;  w.  inter- 
jections, p.  303,  7  ;  w.  preposi- 
tions, 176,  1  ;  177,  1  ;  197  B  c 
(p.  303)  ;■  adverbial,  178,  2  ; 
197,  5  ;  double,  198 ;  inf., 
167,  2  ;  211,  2. 

Action  nouns,  182,  1. 

Active  voice  (Parasmaipada),  121. 

Adjectives,  86  ;  87  ;  88  ;  93  ;  95  c ; 
120  ;  186  B  ;  w.  inst.,  199,  2  «,  b; 
w.  gen.,  202  C  ;  w.  inf.,  211, 1  b  ; 
211,  Baa;  211,  3  b  a. 

Adverbial,  suffixes,  179  :  w.  inst. 
sense,  171,  1 ;  w,  abl  sense, 
179,  2  ;  vv.  loc.  sense,  179,  3  ; 
particles,  180. 

Adverbs,  180;  compound,  197  A  5 
b  S,  €  (p.  301);  compounded 
w.  verbs,  184  b,  w. gd.,  164, 1  a  ; 
numeral,  108 a-c;  prepositional, 
177;  w.  gen.,  202  d. 

Agent,  expressed  by  inst.,  199,  2  ; 
nouns,  101,  2  ;  152,  f.  n.  1  ; 
182,   1  ;    w.  gdv.,   209,   1   a,  3, 


500 


GENERAL   INDEX 


4,  5  a ;    w.   inf.    in   ps.    sense, 

211  bp. 
Analogy,  97,  f.  n.  5  !p.  77)  ;  of  an 

stems,  p.  78,  f.  n.  15  ;  of  r  stems, 

99,    1,    f.   n.    1  ;    139,    6   (pf.^  ; 

p.  273,  f.  n.  3. 
Anai)horic  use  of  ti,  195  B  3  6  ; 

of  et^,  195  B  4  ft. 
Antitlietical  clause,  accentuation 

of,  p.  468,  p. 
Aorist,  141-9  ;  meaning  of,  213  C  ; 

accent  of  its  moods,  p.  460, 12  d. 
Apodosis  in  conditional  sentences, 

216  (p.  364,  yadi  2)  ;  218,  1. 
Apposition,  position  of,  191  d  ;  in 
_  descriptive  compounds,  188,  1. 
Aranyakas,  1. 

Archaisms  in  compounds,  49  ;  50. 
Article,    non-existent,    192  ;     in- 
cipient in  B.,  195  B  3  &. 
Articulation,  jjlionetic  position  of, 

29. 
Aspiration,    3   c ;    initial,    40,   1  ; 

53-5 ;  of  s,  53  a ;  of  h,  54  ;  of 

g,  d,  b,  55 ;    loss   of,    62  ;    62, 

f.    n.    1  ;    thrown   back,    62  a ; 

134   B  1    ?; ;    thrown   forward, 

62  b  ;  loss  of  initial,  141 «,  f.  n.  1 

(p.  160)  ;  143,  6  ;  148,  1  </. 
Aspirates,  15,  2  ;  30,  2  ;  avoidance 

of  two,  55,  f.  n.  1. 
Assimilation,    16  ;    29  ;    32  ;    33  ; 

34  ;   37  ;   38  ;   40,  1.  3  ;  43,  3 ; 

60  o. 
Attraction  of  ace.  by  dat.,  200  B  4  ; 

of  ace.  by  gen.  inf.,  211,  3  ?;  a  ; 

in  gender  and  number,  194,  3. 
Attribute  (adj.  or  gen.),  position 

of,  191  e. 
Aufrecht,  Prof.,  2,  f.  n.  1  ;  p.  33, 

f.  n.  6  ;  p.  38,  f.  n.  1. 
Augment,    15,    1    c  ;    23   c ;    128  ; 

lengthened,  128  a  ;  140,  6  ;  141 

a;   148,   Id;  Sandhi  of,  128  J;  ; 

accented,  p.  459,  12  a. 
Avesta,  p.  67,  f.  n.  4  ;  134,  2  b  ; 

137,  2  a  (f.  n.  2)  ;  p.  436,  f.  n.  3  ; 

p.  438,  f.  n.  1 ;  p.  439,  f.  n.  3  ; 

p.  440,  f.  n.  1;    p.  441,  f.  n.  5; 

p.  442,  f.  n.  1. 

Benedictive  (or  Precative),  150. 


Brahmanas,    1  ;    2  ;    28,  f.   n.  3  ; 
76  b,  f.  n.  1  ;  79,  3  a,  f.  n.  3  ; 
97   ft   a  :    p.    78,    f.   n.    9 ;    107 
(p.  102),  f.  n.  1  ;  113  «  ;  22  a  a 
139,5;  139,  9a  ;  149;  154,6  6 
161,   f.  n.  6 ;    162,   4,  f.  n.    1 
163,  1,  f.  n.  1  ;  166,  167 ;  168 
172  ;  190  ;  191  ;  p.  452,  7. 

Break,  metrical,  p.  440,  4  B. 

Breathing  h,  7  a  4  ;  15,  2  ?  ; 
29  c  ;  origin  of,  13  ;  becomes  k 
before  s,  69  a  ;  treated  like  gh 
l)eforo  t,  th,  dh,  69  b. 

Cadence,  p.  436  ;  p.  438  ;  p.  440, 
4  B ;  trochaic,  p.  440,  4  B  ; 
p.  442,  6  ;  p.  443,  8  a. 

Caesura,  p.  436 ;  p.  440,  4  B ; 
double,  p.  442,  7  a. 

Cardinals,  104-6  ;  intermediate 
between  decades,  104  a ;  as 
Dvandvas,  186  A  2,  f.  n.  3  ; 
concord  of,  194  B  1  a,  b ;  ac- 
centuation of,  Y>.  457,  116  a. 

Case-endings,  16  a  ;  normal,  71  ; 
sometimes  retained  in  com- 
pounds, 187  a  ;  188,  2  3  ;  189, 2. 

Case-forms,  adverbial,  178  :  nom., 

I  ;  ace,  2  ;  inst.,  3  ;  dat ,  4  ; 
abl.,  5  ;  gen.,  6  ;  loc,  7. 

Cases,  70  c;  strong,  73;  position 
of,  191  c  ;  synt.  use  of,  196-205. 

Causal  sense  of  inst.,  199  A  3  ;  of 
.abl.,  201  B. 

Causative,  124 ;  168  ;  tenses  and 
moods  of,  168  c;  sense  of  ao., 
149 ;  sf.  dropped,  154,  6  a  ; 
160,  3  ;  sf.  23artl}^  retained  in 
red.  ao.,  149  a  3  ;  ft.,  151  ;  synt. 
use  of,  198  A  3. 

Cerebi'al  sibilant  s,  12  6  ;  in  dec. 
and  conj.  ,64a;   z,  8,  f.  n.  1  ; 

II  c  ;  49  c  (in  cds.)! 
Cerebralization,  of  ch,  63  d  ;  of  j, 

63  ;  of  s,  63  b ;  of  dentals, 
15,  2  7t  a  ;  64  ;  69  c  ;  of  n,  10  c  ; 
65  ;  66,  2  b  ;  of  n  in  cds.,  50  c  ; 
65  a  ;  65  6  ;  of  n  in  external 
Sandhi,  65  c  ;  of  initial  d,  n  in 
cds.,  49  c  ;  of  dh,  160,  2,  f  n.  1  ; 
of  s,  50  6  ;  67  ;  81  «,  f.  n.  2  ; 
83,  2  6,  2  c  ;    of  s  in  vb.  cds., 


GENERAL   INDEX 


501 


67  a  ;  of  s  in  nom.  cds,,  67  b  ; 

of  s  in  external  Sandlii,  67  c  ; 

of  Visarjaniya,  43,  1  a ;   43,  2 

a;  absence  of,  67,  f.  n.  1,  8,  4  ; 

92,  f.  n.  1. 
Cerebrals,  3  b  y  ;  29  a  ;  internal 

Sanilhi  of,  64  ;  65  ;  67  ;  origin 

of,  8  ;  pronunciation  of,  15,  2  d  ; 

stems  in,  80. 
Changeable      consonant      steins, 

84-96 ;    irregularities    of,    96 ; 

peculiarities  of,  94  ;  fem.  of,  95. 
Cognate  accusative,  197,  4. 
Collective  Dvandvas,  186  A  3. 
Comparative  Philology,  17,  f.  n.  2 ; 

p.  451,  6. 
Comparison,     degrees     of,     103 ; 

implied  in  compounds,  188, 1,  a ; 

189,  1  a  ;  189,  2  a. 
Compounded    participles,   accent 

of,  p.  462,  13. 
Compounds,  184-9  ;  classification 

of,    185  b ;    gender    of,    185   a  ; 

verbal,   184 ;    doubly  accented, 

p.    452,    7  ;     accentuation    of, 

p.  454,  10. 
Concomitance,  expressed  by  inst., 

199  A. 
Concord,  194. 
Conditional,    153  ;    synt.   vise  of, 

218  ;  in  rel.  clauses,  p.  368,  2  ; 

in  periods,  218,  1  ;  w.  ydd  and 

op.,    Y>.    363  7  1  ;    w.    yMi   if, 

p.  364,  2  ;  w.  c6d  if,  p.  366,  5. 
Conjugation,  121-75  ;  first,  125  ; 

graded,   124  ;  paradigms  of  pr. 

system,  132  ;  second,  126. 
Conjugational  classes,   124  ;  125  ; 

127 ;      irregularities    of,     133  ; 

134. 
Conjugations,    two,    124  ;    secon- 
dary,   ibid.  :     accentuation    of, 

p.  461,  12  e. 
Conjunctive  particles,  180. 
Connecting  vowel  a,    147  ;    149 

i,  89  a;  136  a;  140,5;  157  a,  b 

160,  3  ;    162,  4.  5  ;    163,   1.   2 

169  ;  i,  140,  6  ;  143,  1. 
Consonant,     endings     w.    initial 

(bhyam,  bhis,  bhyas,  su),  16  a  ; 

73  a  ;  stems,  75-96. 
Consonants,    6-14  ;    changes    of. 


32  ;  37  ;  classification  of,  29  ; 
30;  doubling  of,  51  (eh);  52 
(ii,  n);  final,  27;  28;  31;   32  ; 

33  ;  76  ;  loss  of,  15,  2k;  28  ; 
61  ;  90,  2  ;  96,  3,  f.  n.  2  ;  lOl  ; 
144  ;  148,  1  d  (ao.);  160,  2, 
f.  n.  1  ;  quality  of,  30 ;  un- 
changeable, 60,  1. 

Contracted       vowels       restored, 

p.  437  a,  6. 
Contraction,    83,    2  a  a   (p.   59) ; 

133,  3«  (pr.);  137,  2«  (f.  n.  1\ 

2  c  (pf.)  ;  149,  irr.  a  2  (red.  ao.) ; 

171,   3    (ds.)  ;    171,    3  a   (ds.) ; 

after  secondary  hiatus,  48  a. 
Couplets,  p.  446,  11. 

Dative,  syntactical  use  of,  200: 
w.  verbs,  200  A  1,  w.  substan- 
tives, A  2,  w.  adjectives,  A  3, 
w.  adverbs,  A  4  ;  of  advantage, 
200  B  1,  of  purpose,  B  2,  of  time, 
B3;  double,  200  B4  ;  adverbial, 
200  B  5  ;  for  gen.,  97  «  a  ;  98  a ; 
f.  n.  8  ;  100,  I  6  j8  (p.  88), 
f.  n.  2;  100,  U  b  a  (p.  89\ 
f.  n.  1. 

Dative  inf.,  167,  1  :  in  e,  a,  in 
ase,  b  1,  in  aye,  b  2,  in  taye, 
b  3,  in  tave,  b  4,  in  tavai,  b  5, 
&  5  a,  in  tyai,  b  6,  in  dhyai, 
b  7,  in  mane,  b  8,  in  vane,  b  9  ; 
synt.  use  of,  211,  1  ;  w.  ps. 
force,  211,  1  6  a  (p.  335). 

Declension,  70-120 :  of  nouns, 
74-102 ;  of  numerals,  104-7  ; 
of  pronouns,  109-20  ;  accent  in, 
p.  457,  11  a. 

Demonstrative  pronouns,  110-12 ; 
synt.  use  of,  195  B  ;  concord 
of,  194  B  3. 

Denominative,  124  ;  175 ;  ao., 
175  B  a  ;  ft.,  ibid.  ;  pj).  ibid. 

Dental :  n,  Handhi  of  finiil,  35  ; 
36 ;  39  ;  40 ;  42,  3  a  ;  52  ; 
66  A  1  ;  66  A  2  ;  s,  changed  to 
t  or  d,  9  a  ;  66  B  1  ;  disappears, 
66  B  2  ;  inserted,  40,  2. 

Dentals,  3  &  S  ;  9a;  10  a  (n)  ; 
15,  2  e  ;  29  a ;  palatalized,  37  a  ; 
38  ;  40  (n)  ;  63  a  ;  cerebralized, 
64  ;  stems  in,  77. 


502 


GENERAL   INDEX 


Derivative  verbs,  168-75. 
Descriptive      compounds,       188  ; 

accent  of,  p.  455,  10  d  1. 
Desiderativc,     124  ;     169  :      170  ; 

171  ;     ao.,     171    a     (p.     201); 

pp.,    ibid. ;    gd.,    ihid. ;     of    cs., 

168  c  (p.  197),  f.  n.  4. 
Determinative  compounds.  185  h  ; 

187  ;   dependent,   187,  2  a  ;  de- 

scriijtive,      187  :       accent      of, 

p.  4.55,  10  d. 
Devanagari  character.  2,  f.  ii.  1. 
Dialects,  11  c. 
Dimeter  verse,  p.  438,  2. 
Dipthongs,  3a;  4  h. 
Dissimilation,    96,  2  ;    134   C   3 ; 

174  a. 
Distance,      expressed      by      ace, 

197  A  3. 
Dodecasyllabic  verse,  p.  442,  6. 
Doubling  of  ch,  51  ;  of  n  and  n, 

52. 
Dravidian  sounds,  8. 
Dual,  synt.  use  of,  193,  2  ;  com- 

poimds,     186   A    1  ;    ellii^tical, 

186  B  3  a  ;  193,  2  «. 

Elision  of  initial  a,  11,  1  a,  b,  c  ; 

19  h,  f.  n.  1  ;  21  a,  f.  n.  4  and  6. 
Emphatic  words,    synt.    j^osition 

of,  191  a. 
Enclitics,  109  a;   112  a;   p.  452, 

8  A  ;  synt.  position  of,  191  h  ; 

195  A  5. 
Endings,    in    dec,   71  ;    in  conj., 

131  (table)  ;  of  pf.,  136  «. 
External  Sandhi,  17-55. 

Feminine,  formation  of,  73,  f.  n.  1 ; 
of  changeable  stems.  95  ;  of  u 
stems,  98  c  (p.  83j  ;  101,  I  h  ; 
of  tr  stems,  101  c ;  of  sec.  cjiv. 
and  spv.  stems,  103,  1  c  ;  of 
ordinals,  107  ;  special  endings 
of  (in  i  and  a  stems),  100,  I  h  ; 
97,  1,  f.  n.  5  ;  suffixes,  183  «. 

Final  consonants  allowable,  27  ; 
28  ;  31  ;  61  ;  76. 

Final  dative,  synt.  position  of, 
191  A,  a  1. 

Frequentative,  see  Intensive. 

Future,    simple,    151  ;    pt.   ps.  = 


gdv.,  162  ;  209  ;  synt.  use  of, 
214  ;  of  cs.,  168,  1  c  ;  peri- 
phrastic, 152  ;  accent  of,  p.  461, 
12  e. 

Gender,  70  a  ;  rules  of,  183  ;  of 
compounds,  18.5  a  ;  in  syntax, 
194  ;  attraction  in,  194,  3. 

Genitive,  synt.  use  of,  202  :  w. 
verbs,  202  A.  w.  substantives,  B, 
adjectives,  C,  adverbs,  D  :  w. 
prepositions,  177,  4  ;  adverbial, 
178,  6  ;  202  C  3  a  :  absolute, 
205,  2  ;  partitive,  202  A  d  ; 
possessive,  202  B  2  «  ;  objective, 
202  B  n- :  subjective,  202  B  1  u. 

Gerund,  122  c  ;  163-6  ;  accentua- 
tion of,  p.  464,  15  ;  compounded 
w.  adv.,  165  ;  w.  noun,  166  ; 
syntactical  use  of,  210. 

Gerundive,  162 ;  synt.  use  of, 
209. 

Goal  of  an  action,  expressed  by 
the  ace,  197,  1  ;  198,  3  h ;  by  the 
loc,  204,  1  b,  c;  198,  3,  f.  n.  2. 

Governing  compounds,  185?*;  189; 
as  substantives.  189,  1  a  ;  w. 
suffixes  a  orya,  189,  1  b  ;  accent 
of,  p.  455,  10  /). 

Grammarians,  Hindu,  5  a. 

Gutturals,  S  b  a  ;  6  ;  7b;  15,  2  b  ; 
29  a  ;  changed  to  palatals,  7ba  : 
reversion  to,  92  ;  134  A  2  c  ; 
160,  1  b  ;  160,  2  ;  171,  4. 

Haplology,  15,  2  b. 

Hard    (surd,    voiceless)    sounds, 

30,  1  ;  32  ;  33. 
Hemistich,    16  ;    18    «  ;    ]>.    438, 

f.  n.  2  ;    p.  439  b  ;    p.    440  C  ; 

p.  441,  5;  p.  443  ;  p.  449,  2«; 

accentuation  of,  p.  465,  f.  n.  4. 
Hendecasyllabic  verse,  p.  440, 4  B. 
Hiatus,   15.   1  /:    16;    21  b  ;    22  ; 

24  ;  45  ;  48;  49;  97,  1,  f.  n.  11; 

avoidance  of,  16;  in  compounds, 

49  ;  restored,  18  6;  19  a,  f.  n.  4  ; 

20  ;  21  6  ;  secondary,  22  a  ;  48  a 

(avoided). 
High  grade  syllables    e,  o,  ar,  al), 

5  rt  ;  (ya,  va,  ra),  5  b  ;  (ya,  va, 

ra),  b  ba  ;  of  i  and  u,  4  &  ;  6a,  b. 


GENERAL   INDEX 


503 


Historical  present,  212,  2. 
Hyi)otlietical  clauses,  216  (under 

yad,  p.  363,  and  ykdi,  p.  361^  ; 

218. 

Imperative,  122  a  ;  formation  of, 
122  «  a;  endings  of,  p.  125; 
root  iio..  148,  4  a  5  ;  is  ao., 
145,  5  ;  sis  ao.,  146,  5  ;  pf., 
140,  4  ;  first  persons  wanting, 
121  ;  syntactical  use  of,  215. 

Impei'fect,  inflected,  132  ;  ps., 
154  c  ;  syntactical  use  of,  213  B. 

Indeclinable,  words,  176-81  ; 
synt.  position  of,  191  f-i;  par- 
ticiple (=  gerund),  210. 

Indefinite  pronouns,  119  b. 

Indo-Eui'opean  period,  p.  451,  6. 

Indo-Iranian,  8;  11  c;  p.  442, 
f.  n.  1  ;  i^eriod,  p.  436,  f.  n.  3. 

Infinitive,  1  ;  122  rZ ;  167  ;  accent 
of,  p.  463,  14  ;  characteristics 
of,  167  a ;  synt.  use  of,  211  ; 
w.  ps.  force,  211,  1  b  a,  0,  5. 

Initial  consonant,  loss  of,  50  a, 
f.  n.  5  ;  134  A  2  &  ;  171,  6. 

Injunctive,  122  «  ;  128  c  ;  forma- 
tion of,  122  a  a  ;  root  ao.,  148,  2  ; 
is  ao.,  145,  3 ;  sis  ao.,  146,  4  ; 
s  ao.,  143,  3  ;  a  ao.,  147,  3  ; 
pf.,  140,  2  ;  synt.  use  of,  215  B. 

Insertion,  of  vowels  :  i,  i,  134  A  3 
Cpr.  stem) ;  i.  134  A2  &  (impf.),' 
172  a  (int.),  173,  3  (int.),  174  6 
(int.)  ;  of  consonants  :  k,  35 
(in  SandliiV  t,  36  a,  40,  1  (in 
.Sandlii),  n,  66  A  2  (in  N.  pi.  n.), 
105,  4  (G.  pi.),  p.  100,  f.  n.  1, 
(C4.  pi.),  n  or  na,  127,  3  (pr. 
stern),  y,  155  (ps.  ao.),  168 
irr.  4  (cs.),  r,  134,  1  c  (pr. 
stem),  s,  40,  1  a  (in  Sandhi), 
s,  40,  2  (in  Sandhi),  134  C  4, 
f.  n.  1  (pr.  stem),  150  (prc.\ 
s,  168,  irr.  4  (cs.). 

Instrumental,  synt.  use  of,  I'J'J  : 
w.  verbs,  199  B  1,  w.  nouns, 
B  2,  w.  numerals,  B  2  c,  w. 
prepositions,  B  3,  177,  2 ;  adv. 
use  of,  178,  3  ;  199  A  G  ;  ex- 
presses means  or  agent,  199  A  2; 
p.  309,  a,  /3. 


Intensive,   124;    127,   2,  f.   n.   1  ; 

172-4  ;  moods  of,  174,  2-4  ;  pt., 

174,  5;   impf.,  174,  6;    pf.,  174, 

6  a  ;  cs. ,  ibid. 
Interchange  of  vowel  and  semi- 
vowel, 134C3;  167,  l,9,f.n.4; 

171_,  2. 
Intej-jections,  181  ;  184  d. 
Interrogative  pronoun,  113  ;  synt. 

position  of,  191  k. 
Iranian,  Old,  11  c,  d;  15,  1  a. 
Irregularities,  of  vowel   Sandhi, 

23  ;    of  consonant  Sandhi,    48  ; 

49  ;  in  declension :  91  ;  92  ;  96  ; 

98  a  :   99  (i  and  u  stems)  ;   in 

conjugation  :      133,     134     (pr. 

stem) ;    156  a,  157  b  a  (pr.  pt. 

act.) ;   158  a  (pr.  j)t.  mid.) ;  139 

(pf.) ;     159   a   (pf.    pt.    mid.)  ; 

144  (s  ao.)  ;    145  a-c  (is   ao.) ; 

147  a-c  (a  ao.)  ;  149  a  (red.  ao.) ; 

151  c  (ft.)  ;  155  a  (ps.  ao.)  ;  168, 

p.  197  (cs.);  171,  l(ds.);   174 

(int.). 
Iteiative,  verbs,  168  ;  compounds, 

185  b  ;  189  C  :  accent  of,  p.  4-54, 

10  a. 

Labials,  3  6  e  ;  9  6;  29  <(  ;  stems 
in,  78. 

Length  by  position,  p.  437  a  3, 

Lengthening,  of  vowels,  15,  1  c  ; 
15,  2  lea;  143,  1.  3  (s  ao.) ;  155 
(ps.  ao.) ;  p.  280,  f.  n.  5 ;  of 
reduplicative  vowel,  139, 9  (pf.) ; 
171,  6  (ds.). 

Local  sense  of  instrumental, 
199  A  4. 

Locative,  sing,  in  i  and  ii  (un- 
contractable\  25  b  ;  inf.,  167,  4 
(p.  195)  ;  211,  4  ;  synt.  use  of, 
203;  local  sense,  203  A  1.  2, 
temporal  sense,  A  8,  adv.  sense, 
A  4  ;  w.  verbs,  204, 1  ;  w.  nouns, 

204,  2  ;    w.  adjectives,  204,  2  b  ; 
w.  prepositions,  176,  2  ;  204,  3  ; 

205,  1. 

Long  vowels  pronounced  as  two  : 
p.  437  a  8. 

Loss  of  sounds  :  of  initial  a,  21  a  ; 
io,  2  b;  134  A  2  6  ;  156  « ;  of 
medial    a   (see    Syncope) ;     of 


504 


GENERAL   INDEX 


medial  u,  134  C 1  ;  134  C  4,  f.  n. 
2  ;  of  final  n,  90  (N.  s.) ;  94,  2 
(N.  s.)  ;  of  radical  nasal,  137,  2  d 
(pf.) ;  133  A  4  (pr.  stem) ;  160,  2 
(pp.)  ;  165  a  (sd.) ;  of  n  in  3.  pi. 
ending,  p.  125,  f.  n,  4 ;  156 
(pt.  act.)  ;  of  Visarjanij^a,  45; 
48;  ofs(N.  s.),  100, 1  6  (p.  87). 
Low  grade  vowels,  i  a  ;  5  I,  c,  d. 

Magadhi  dialect,  11  c. 

Mantras,  1. 

Manuscripts,  age  of,  2. 

Masculine  suffixes,  183. 

Max  Muller,  p.  33,  f.  n.  6  ;  p.  38, 

f.  n.  1. 
Metathesis,  11  ca  ;  103, 2  a  (cpv.)  ; 

144.  4  (s  ao.)  ;  167,  2  b  (inf.). 
Metre,  1  ;    16  ;    18  &  ;    19  a;    20 ; 

21  ;     22    a;     41    a ;     49  ;     52  ; 

191  ;    194  B  1  ;    Appendix   II, 

pp.  436-47. 
Middle,  stem,  72;  73  a,  b;  101,  2, 

note;  185a;  voice,  121;  endings, 

131  (p.  126). 
Monosyllabic  stems,  accentuation 

of,  p.  4.58,  c  1. 
Moods,    122   a ;    140,    1-4    (pf.)  ; 

171,  p.  200  (ds.) ;  synt.  use  of, 

215-18. 
Multiples,  formation  of,  104  b. 
Multiplicatives,  108  a,  c;  w.  gen., 

202  D  3. 
Mutes,  3  b. 

Nasal,  loss  of,  89  (pf.  pt.) ;  133 
(pr.);  134  D  ;  134  E  3  ;  137,  2  rf 
(pf.) ;  139,  1  ;  140,  f.  n.  4 ; 
144,  3  (s  ao.) ;  147  irr.  b  (aao.)  ; 
148, 1  e  (rt.  ao.)  ;  149  (red.  ao.)  ; 
154,  5  (ps.);  167,  1,  f.  n.  5 
(inf.)  ;  160,  2  (pp.)  ;  165  a  (gd.) ; 
171,  1  (ds.)  ;  188,  2a  ;  insertion 
of,  79,  3  a,  f.  n.  2,  3;  pure, 
10  /;  sonant,  4  a ;  127,  4  a  ; 
134  C  4  a  ;  143,  4,  f.  n,  3  ;  p.  163, 
f.  u.  3 ;  p.  185,  f.  n.  1. 

Nasalization,  19  a,  f.  n.  5  ;  19  6, 
f.  n.  1  ;  24,  f.  n.  2  ;  79,  3  a, 
f.  n.  2  ;  133  C  1. 

Nasals,  3;  10;  15,  2  /;  29  6; 
final,  35  (in  Sandhi). 


Neuter,  73  b  (changeable  stems)  ; 

97,  1  a  (a  stems)  ;  98  a  (i  and  u 

stems)  ;    101,   2   b   (tr   stems) ; 

suffixes,    183  b ;    synt.    use   of, 

194  A  1  ;  B  2  &. 
Nominal       compounds,       185-9 ; 

characteristics  of,  185. 
Nominal  stem  formation,  182-4. 
Nominal   verb   forms,  accent  of, 

pp.  462-4. 
Nominative,   synt.    use   of,    196  ; 

predicative,    196    a ;    w.    iti  = 

ace,  196  a  ^  ;  for  voc,  196  c  a. 
Nouns,    declension    of,    74-102 ; 

classification  of,  74. 
Number,  70  b  ;   121  a ;   synt.  use 

of,  193. 
Numeral,  as  first  member  of  poss. 

cd.,  189,  3  c  ;  derivatives,  108  ; 

adv.  Av.  gen.,  202,  3. 
Numerals,  104-8. 

Objective  genitive,  202  Bib. 

Octosyllabic  verse,  p.  438,  2. 

Opening  of  a  verse,  p.  438,  2  ; 
p.  440,  4  B. 

Optative  (Potential),  122a ;  forma- 
tion of,  122  a  a;  pf.,  140,  3  ; 
s  ao.,  143,  4  ;  is  ao.,  145,  4  ;  sis 
ao.,  146,  3  ;  a  ao.,  147,  4  ;  rt. 
ao.,  148,  4  ;  synt.  use  of,  216. 

Oral  tradition,  2. 

Order  of  words,  191. 

Ordinals,  107  ;  fem.  of,  ibid. 

Palatal,  aspirate  eh,  7  a  1  ;  13  ; 
old  sibilant  z,  15,  2  A;  a  ;  s  and 
eh  before  s,  63  b  ;  spirant  y, 
15,2  g  ;  sibilant  s,  12  a,  inser- 
tion of,  40,  1  a. 

Palatalization  of  n,  63  c. 

Palatals,  3  b  13  ;  29  a  ;  two  series 
of,  7  ;  new,  7  b  ;  old,  7a;  81  a  ; 
before  gutturals,  63  ;  before  s, 
63  &  ;  revert  to  gutturals,  139,  4  ; 
140,  6,  f.  n.  2  ;  148,  1  h,  f.  n.  8  ; 
157  &  a  ;  157  a,  f.  n.  2  ;  ICO,  1  ; 
160,  1  b ;  171,  4 ;  represent 
gutturals  in  reduplication, 
129,  3  ;  nominal  stems  in,  79. 

Participles,  156-62;  122  6;  act., 
85 ;   156  ;   157  ;   mid.   and  ps., 


GENERAL   INDEX 


505 


168-62  ;  pr.,  85  ;  156  ;  pr.  mid., 
158 ;  pr.  ps.,  154  c ;  pf.  act., 
89;  140,  5;  157;  pf.  mid., 
159  ;  ao.  act.,  85  ;  156  ;  a  ao., 
147,  6;  ft.  act.,  85;  151  &  2  ; 
156;  ft.  mid..  158;  pp.,  160; 
ft.  ps.  pt.  (gdv.),  162  ;  indec. 
(gd.),  163;  fem.  of  pr.  and  ft., 
95  ff,  6 ;  synt.  use  of,  206-10 ; 
characteristics  of,  206  ;  durative 
sense  of  pr.,  207  a  ;  pr.  =  finite 
verb,  207  ;  \v.  gen.  absolute, 
205,  2  ;  w.  loc.  absolute,  205,  1  ; 
pp.  as  finite  verb,  208  ;  pp.  used 
periphrastically,  208rt,  b;  mean- 
ing and  construction  of  ft.  ps., 
209  ;  construction  of  indec,  210. 

Partitive  genitive,  202  B  2  b. 

Passive,  121  ;  154  (par.)  ;  155 
(ao.) ;  pr.  stem,  121  ;  154  ;  sb., 
154  b  ;  cs.  stem,  154,  6  a  ;  past 
pt.  =  finite  vb.,  208  ;  w.  as  and 
bhu  =  periphrastic  mood  or 
tense,  208  a,  b. 

Past  tenses,  meaning  and  synt. 
use  of,  213. 

Pentasyllabic  verse,  p.  442,  8. 

Perfect,  135-40  ;  endings  of,  13() ; 
paradigmsof,  138 ;  irreguhirities 
of,  139  ;  moods  of,  140 ;  synt. 
use  of,  213  A  ;  act.  pt.  unre- 
dti plicated,  157  6  ;  pt.  mid., 
159  ;  pt.  ps.,  160  :  formed  w. 
both  ta  and  na,  160,  1  a  ;  ac- 
centuation of,  App.  Ill,  12  c. 

Periphrastic  forms  :  ft.,  152, 
forerunners  of,  152,  f.  n.  1, 
sense  of,  214  B  ;  pf.,  139,  9  a. 

Personal  pi-onouns,  109  ;  limited 
use  of,  195  A. 

Phoneticians,  native,  p.  448,  1. 

Pluperfect,  140,  6 ;  meaning  of, 
213  D. 

Plural,  elliptical  use  of,  193,  3  a  ; 
loose  use  of,  193,  3  b  ;  Dvandvas, 
18G  A  1. 

Possessive,  compounds,  185  b ; 
189  ;  gen.,  202  B  2  a. 

Potential,  see  Optative. 

Prati^akhyas,  11  ;  15,  1  a,  b,  d  ; 
15,  2 ;  15,2  e,  g,  i,  j ;  42,  2, 
f.  n.  2;  51  ;  p.  465,  f.  n.  1. 


Precative  (Benedictive),  150  ;  pf., 
140,  3  a;  rt.  ao.,  148,  4  a; 
synt.  use  of,  217. 

Predicative  adjective,  concoi'd  of, 
194  B  2  ;  noun,  synt.  position 
of,  191  b. 

Prepositions,  176  ;  adverbial, 
176,  1  ;  adnominal,  177  ;  com- 
pounded w.  roots,  184,  2  ;  syn- 
tactical jiosition  of,  191/;  synt. 
accentuation  of,  Apj).  Ill,  20. 

Present,  system,  123-34  ;  tense, 
synt.  use  of,  212  A ;  stems, 
plurality  of,  212 ;  for  ft.,  212A3; 
pt.  =  finite  vb.,  207,  expressing 
duration,  207  «  ;  accentuation 
of,  p.  459,  12  &;  p.  458  c  (pr.  pt.). 

Primary  endings,  131  ;  nom.  suf- 
fixes, 182, 1  ;  182, 1  b  :  accentua- 
tion of,  p.  453,  9  A. 

Principal  clause,  verb  unaccented 
in,  App.  Ill,  19  A. 

Pronominal  adjectives,  105,  1  ; 
107,  f.  n.  4  ;  120  ;  declension  : 
109-20 ;  its  influence  on  no- 
minal forms,  97,  f.  n.  1,  2 
(p.  77) ;  120. 

Pronouns,  109-20  ;  personal,  109  ; 
demonstrative,  110-12;  inter- 
rogative, 113  ;  relative,  114  ; 
reflexive,  115  ;  possessive,  116  ; 
compound  and  derivative,  117- 
18  ;  indefinite,  119  ;  syntactical 
use  of,  195. 

Pronunciation,  ancient,  15 ; 
Greek,  of  Sanskrit  words,  ibid.  ; 
of  vowels,  15,  1  a ;  of  diph- 
thongs, 15,  1  6  ;  of  consonants, 
15,  2  ;  of  1,  15,  2  g. 

Proper  names,  189,  3  a  ;  189  A  2  ; 
193,  2  a,  3  a;  200  A  2  7. 

Prosodical  rule,  18  6,  f.  n.  1  ;  25  a. 

Prosody,  rules  of,  p.  437  a. 

Protasis,  216  (vv.'yid,  p.  363,  and 
y^di,  p.  364) ;  218,  1. 

Purpose,  expressed  by  dative, 
200  B  2. 


Radical  vowel  lengthened,  143,  1 ; 
145, 1  ;  155  ;  171,  6  ;  shortened, 
149;  171,  6;  174. 


506 


GENERAL   INDEX 


Reason,  expressed  by  inst., 
199  A  3  ;  by  abl.,  201  B. 

Reduplicated  root  as  nom.  stem, 
182,  1  a. 

Reduplication,  general  rules  of, 
129,  1-6  ;  sj^ecial  rules  of,  130 
(pr.)  ;  135,  1-4  (pf.)  ;  119  a,  b 
(ao.l  ;  170  (ds.)  ;  173  (int.) ; 
w.  an-,  139,  6  (pf.) ;  w.  reijeatecl 
nasal,  173,  3  (int.)  ;  w.  inserted 
nasal,  171  a  (int.)  ;  of  vowel  in 
second  syllable,  149.  irr.  3 ; 
171,  6  a  ;  dropped.  139,  3  (pf.) ; 
157  h  (pf.  pt.)  ;  171,  6  (ds.). 

Relatives,  synt.  position  of,  191  /.-. 

Restoration  of  elided  a,  21  «,  f.  n. 
5,  G. 

Rhotacism,  11  t,  d. 

Rhythm,  quantitative,  p.  436,  1  ; 
iambic,  p.  436 ;  p.  438  ;  p.  440, 
ili. 

Rhythmic,  rule,  136  a,  f.  n.  3  (pf.\* 
139,  9,  f.  n.  2  (pf.)  ;  149  (re  i. 
ao.)  ;  tendency,  50  rf. 

Rigveda,  1  ;  2. 

Root,  as  nom.  stem,  182.  1  a  ;  ao., 
148. 

Roots,  two  or  more  used  in  in- 
iiexion  of  same  vb.,  212  ;  secon- 
dary, 134  C  4  a. 

Sandhi,16-69;  accentin.p.  464.17 ; 
nature  of,  16  ;  1.  external,  16- 
55  :  of  vowels,  18  ;  19  ;  20  ;  of 
diphthongs,  21  ;  22  ;  irr.  vowel, 
23  ;  absence  of  vowel,  24-6  ;  of 
consonants,  27-55  ;  of  final  k, 
t,  t,  p  before  n  or  m,  33  ;  of 
final  t  before  1,  34,  before  pala- 
tals, 38  ;  of  final  nasals.  35  ;  of 
final  dental  n,  36  ;  39  ;  40  ;  of 
final  m,  41 ;  42  ;  42,  3  a  and 
f.  n.  5  (ambiguous) ;  of  final 
Visarjaniya,  43 ;  43,  2  a  and 
3 ;  44 ;  of  the  final  syllable 
ah,  45,  2 ;  46 ;  48  ;  of  the 
final  syllable  ah,  45,  1  ;  46  ;  of 
final  r,  46  ;  47  ;  2.  internal  : 
56-69  ;  of  vowels,  57  ;  58  ;  of  r, 
58;  154,  3;  of  f,  58;  154,  4; 
of  diphthongs,  59 ;  of  conso- 
nants, 60  ;  61 ;  of  aspii-ates,  62  ; 


of  palatals  before  consonants, 

63  ;   of  dentals  after  cerebrals, 

64 ;  65 ;   of  dental  n  before  y, 

V,  s,  66,  1.  2  ;  of  dental  s,  66  B ; 

67  ;   of  m  before  y,  r,  1,  v,  68  ; 

of  h    before    s,   t,   th,  dh,   69  ; 

3.  in  compounds:  49-50;  185 

(p.  268) ;  arcbaismsin,  49a,6,c,rf. 
Sanski-it,  Classical,  1. 
Snmhitfi  text,  2  ;  15,  1  a;  16. 
Samhitas,  1  ;  2. 
Schroeder,    Prof.    L.    v.,    p.   450, 

f.  n.  3. 
Second  Aorist,  147-9. 
Secondary,    endings,    131 ;    nom. 

suffixes,    182,    2 ;    accentuation 

of,  p.  453,  9  B  ;  shortening  of 

i,  u,  r,  5  e. 
Semivowel  r,  originally  cerebral, 

15,  2  i/. 
Semivowels.    3c;    11  ;    15,    2  g  ; 

17  B  1  ;  20  ;  29  c  ;  pronounced 

as  vowels,  p.  437  a  5. 
Sentence,      16 ;       190 ;      accent, 

p.  464,  IS. 
Sibilants,  B  d;  7  a  2  ;  12  ;  15,  2h  ; 

29  d;   assimilation  of,  12,  a,  I; 

loss  of.  15,  2  /.■ ;  66  B  2  ;  traces 

of   soft,    7   a   3;    8;    15,    2   /; ; 

15,  2  A- ;  15,  2  A-  a  ;  29  d. 
Singular   number,   sti'ict   use   of, 

193,  1. 
Sociative  sense  of  inst.,  199  A  1. 
Soft     (sonant,     voiced)     sounds, 

30,  1. 
Space,  extension  of,  expressed  by 

ace,  197,  3. 
Spelling,  misleading,  p.  437,  a  9. 
Spirants,  S  g  ;  14  ;  15  ;  29  e. 
Stanzas,  p.  437  ;  simple,  pp.  438- 

43  ;     mixed,     pp.     443-5 ;     irr. 

mixed,  p.  445, 10 Z)  a, /3 ;  strophic, 

pp.  446-7. 
Stem  formation,  nominal,  182. 
Stems,  classification  of  nominal, 

74  ;  ending  in  consonants,  74- 

96 ;   unchangeable    stems,    75- 

183 ;    nouns   with    two,    85-8  ; 

nouns      with     three,      89-93  ; 

ending     in     vowels,     97-102 ; 

accentuation        of        nominal, 

p.  453,  9. 


GENERAL   INDEX 


507 


Strong  stem,  in  declension,  72  ; 
73 ;  97,  2  a ;  in  conjugation, 
124;  126  (pr.);  134  (pr.)  ;  136 
(pf.)  ;  143  (s  ao.)  ;  145  (is  ao.) ; 
148,  1  (rt.  an.) ;  in  weak  forms, 
134  B  3a;  134C45;  148,  5. 

Strophe,  p.  437. 

Subject,  synt.  position  of,  191  a  ; 
exceptional  position  of,  191  ka2. 

Subjective  genitive,  202  B  1  a. 

Subjunctive,  1  ;  122  a  ;  formation 
of,  122  a  a  ;  140,  1  (pf.)  ;  143,  2 
(s  ao.) ;  145,  2  (is  ao.)  ;  146  (sis 
ao.)  ;  147,  2  (a  ao.)  ;  148,  2  (rt! 
ao.) ;  synt.  use  of,  215  C. 

Subordinate  clause,  verb  accented 
in,  App.  Ill,  19  B. 

Substantives  compounded  w.  gd., 
164,  1  a  ;  184  c  ;  w.  participle, 
184  c. 

Suffixes,  primary,  182,  1  ;  secon- 
dary, 182,  2 ;  16  a  ;  s  and  t  of 
2.  3.  s.  irre£;ularly  retained, 
28  a  a  (cp.  f.  n.  3). 

Superlative  suffix  in  tama,  103, 1 ; 
in  istha,  103,  2. 

Sutras',' 1 ;  97  a  a  ;  166. 

Syncope,  78,  3  a ;  90,  1.  2.  3  (an 
stems);  133,  3«(pr.);  134  A2c 
(pr.)  ;  134  B  3  (pr.)  ;  137,  2  6 
(pf.)  ;  139,  2  (pf.)  ;  148,  1  e,  g 
(rt.  ao.)  ;  149,  irr.  a  2  (red.  ao.)  ; 
156  a  (pr.  pt.)  ;  157  a,  f.  n.  1 
Vpf.pt.);  160,  2«(pp.);  171,3 
(ds.) ;  p.  458,  2. 

Syntactical  compounds,  185  h ; 
189  B. 

Syntax,  1;  190-218;  charac- 
teristics  of  Vedic,  190. 


Temporal  sense  of  ace,  197  A  2  ; 

of    inst.,    199   A   5;     of    dat., 

200  B  3  ;  of  gen.,  202  D  3  a  ;  of 

loc,  203,  3. 
Tenses,  122  ;  synt.  use  of,  212-14. 
Terminations,  see  Endings. 
T)ian  expressed  by  abl.,  201  A  3. 
Time,     ace.     of,     197,     2;     inst. 

of,   199  A  5  ;    dat.   of,  200"  B  3  ; 

gen.    of,    202    D    3  a;    loc.    of, 

203,  3. 


Tmesis  of  compounds,  185  (p.  267, 

f.  n.  1) ;  186  A  1. 
Transfer    stems,    in    pr.    system, 

130    rt,    f.    n.    4;    134    C    4   /S ; 

134  E  4a;  in  ppf.,  140,  6;  in 

ao.,  147  rt,  6. 
Triplets,  p.  446,  11. 

Unaccented     pronouns,     109    a ; 

112  a;  195  b;  synt.  position  of, 

191  h;  195  &. 
Unaspii'ated  consonants,  30,  2. 
Qnaugmented  forms,  128  c. 
Unchangeable    consonant   stems. 

75-83. 
Un reduplicated  pf.  forms,  139,  3  ; 

139,  3a;  157  h. 
Upanisads,  1. 

Vedas,  1  ;  2. 

Vedic  language,  1  ;  sounds  of,  3. 

Velars,  3  b  a  ;  6 ;  1  h  ;  15,  2  h. 

Verb,  concord  of  the,  194  A  1  ; 
synt.  position  of,  191  a  ;  w.  two 
s.  subjects,  194  A  2  a ;  w,  more 
than  two,  194  A  2  &  ;  w.  subjects 
of  different  numbers,  194  A  3  ; 
w.  subjects  of  different  persons, 
194  A  3 ;  synt.  accent  of, 
p.  466,  19  ;  loses  accent,  jd.  452. 
8  B  ?>. 

Verbal  compounds,  65  a  ;  184. 

Verbs  governing  two  ace,  198  ; 
inst.,  199  B  1  ;  dat.,  200  A  1  ; 
abl.,  201  A  1  ;  gen.,  202  A  ;  loc, 
204,  1. 

Vocative,  71  a ;  72  a  ;  76  a  ;  94,  3  ; 
98  & ;  for  predicative  nom., 
196  c  ;  accent  of,  p.  457,  11  a  ; 
p.  465,  18  ;  loses  accent,  p.  452, 
8  B  a ;  compound,  p.  466, 
f.  n.  3,  4. 

Voices  of  the  verb,  121. 

Vowel  shortened  before  vowel, 
p.  437,  a  4. 

Vowel  declension,  97-102 :  stems 
in  a,  a,  97  ;  in  i,  u,  98  ;  irr. 
i,  u  stems,  99  ;  in  i,  ii,  100  ;  in 
r,  101  ;  in  ai,  o,  au,  102. 

Vowels,  3  rt  ;  4  «  ;  classification 
of,  17  ;  changed  to  semivowels, 


508 


GENEEAL   INDEX 


20 ;  coalescence  of,  18 ;  19 ; 
contraction  avoided,  19  a, 
f.  n.  2  ;  24  ;  25  ;  26  ;  gradation 
of,  5  ;  loss  of,  15,  1  e  ;  127,  4 
f.  n.  3  ;  131  A  2  6  ;  134  C  1  ; 
145  a ;  long  by  jjosition  before 
oh,  51 ;  lengthened,  47  ;  69  c 
(cp,  f.  n.  4) ;  78,  1  a ;  78,  2  a ; 
82  (i,  u) ;  83,  2  (N.  pi.  n.) ; 
83, 2  a  (N.  s,  m.  f.) ;  85  a(mahat) ; 
86  (mat,  vat  steins)  ;  87  (in 
stems)  ;  90  (an  stems)  ;  92 
(han)  ;  94,  1  (N.  s.)  ;  96,  1.  2 
131  (p.  125),  f.  n.  1  ;  133  B  3 
144,  3  ;  145,  1 ;  145,  5a;  149 
151  c ;  154,  2  (ps.)  ;  155  (ps. 
ao.)  ;  160,  2  c  (pp.) ;  162,  1  c 
(gdv.);  169,  1  (ds.);  171,  1 
(ds.) ;  173,  2  a  (int.)  ;  175  A  1 
(den.) ;     lengthened    in    com- 


pounds, 49  e;  50  d  ;  shortened, 
89  (pf.  pt.)  ;  94,  3  (voc.) ;  129,  6 
(red.) ;  133  B  1  (pr.) ;  149  (red. 
ao.) ;  174  i^int.) ;  187  a  a  (p.  273) ; 
shortened  in  compounds,  50  e  ; 
shortened  before  other  vowels, 
18  6;  18  6,  f.  n.  1  ;  19  a,  f.  n.  5  ; 
20,  f.  n.  2; 
(p.  86^  f.  n.  2 
2  / ;  19  a,  f.  n 
terminations  beginning  w.,  76 
stems  in,  97-102. 

Weak  stem,  in  dec,  72;  84;  in 
conj.,  134A2(pr.);137,  l(pf.); 
160,  2  (pp.)  ;  in  first  member 
of  compounds,  185  a. 

Weakest  stem,  72  ;  73  h. 

Weber,  Prof.  A.,  2,  f.  n.  1. 

Writing,  introduction  of,  2, 


26   b ;    100,    I   a 
;    nasalized,  15 
.  5 ;   19  &,  f.  n,  J 


Printed  in  England  at  the  Oxford  University  Press 


221- 


m  3     ^988 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


J 


