IM' 


^^^K;<'  '1 

It 


0       i'    '  1  "'' 


.t  *.  »'«l»9tol  A.„. 


PRIWCETOlSr,  N.  J. 


Shelf.. 


BL  1010  .S3  V.43 
Satapathabr  ahma  na. 
The  satapatha-br  ahmana 


THE 


SACRED  BOOKS  OF  THE  EAST 


[43] 


HENRY   FROWDE,   M.A. 

PUBLISHER  TO  THE   UNIVERSITV   OF  OXFOKl) 


LONDON,    EDINBURGH,    AND    NEW    YORK 


THE 


SACRED  BOOKS  OF  THE  EAST 


TRANSLATED 


\\\  \'ARl()US  ORIENTAL  SCHOLARS 


AND   EDITED    BY 

F.    MAX    MULLER 


VOL.   XLIII 


AT    THE    CLARENDON    PRESS 
1897 

[AU  rights  reserved'] 


0);forJ( 


PRINTED   AT   THE  CLARENDON   PRESS 

BY   HORACE   HART,   M.A. 
PRINTER   TO   THE   UNIVERSITY 


THE 


5ATAPATHA-BRAHMANA 


ACCORDING     TO     THE     TEXT     OF     THE 


mAdhyandina  school 


TRANSLATED     BV 

JULIUS     EGGELING 


PART    IV 


BOOKS    VIII,    IX,    AND    X 


AT    THE    CLARENDON    PRESS 
1897 

[  All  rights  reserved  ] 


CONTENTS. 


Introduction    . 


PAGE 

xiii 


EIGHTH  KAA^Z>A. 


The  Building  of  the  Sacred  F 

First  Layer  (continued) : — 

Pra;/abhm  (5  sets  of  10  each) 

Lokamp;7>/a 
Second  Layer : — 

Asvint  (5)  . 

i??tavya  (2) 

Vaijvadevi  (5) 

Prawabhrzt  (5) 

Apasya  (5) 

^^andasya  (19) 

Lokamprz'wa 
Third  Layer  : — 

Svayamatr/««a  (i) 

Di.ya(5)    . 

Vii-va^yotis  (i) 

i?2'tavya  (4) 

Pra?/abli/7t  (10) 

A7iandasya  (36) 

^'alakhilya  (14) 

Lokamp;7>/a 
Fourth  Layer  :— 

Stoma  (18) 

Spr/t  (10). 


re-altar  (continued). 


1 
I 

22 

22 

23 
29 

30 
33 
34 
36 
41 
41 
42 

43 
47 
48 

51 

51 

54 

58 

58 

59,  77 
66 


VIU 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 

i??tavya  (2) 

70 

Sr/sh/i(i7) 

71 

Lokampn«a 

82 

Fifth  Layer : — 

82 

Asapatna  (5) 

83 

A^/^andasya,  or  Vira^  (4  sets  of  10  eacl 

1)       • 

83,87 

Stomabhaga  (29) 

92 

Nakasad  (5)        .         .         .         . 

97 

Vznkd^kMdi.  (5)     . 

103 

^/zandasya  (10  sets  of  3  each)     . 

109 

Garhapatya  hearth  (8) 

117 

Puna^/^iti  (8)        .         .         .         . 

.     119 

7??'tavya  (2) 

■     125 

Vijva^yotis  (i)    • 

.     129 

Lokampn«a  (i) 

■     131 

Vikarwi  (i) 

•     141 

Svayamatr2«72a  (i) 

142 

Samans  sung  thereon   . 

■     145 

Scattering  of  100  chips  of  gold  on  altar 

146 

Symbolical  meaning  of  layers 

• 

• 

.     147 

NINTH  KAiVZ?A. 

6'atarudriya 

Oblations  on  three  enclosing-stones 

Avatana  (unstringing)  libations     . 

Pratyavaroha  (redescending)  libations 

Sprinkling  of  altar 

Throwing  of  stone  towards  Nirmi's  quarter 

Taking  possession  of  the  bricks,  as  milch  cows 

Drawing  of  frog,  lotus-flower,  and  bamboo-shoot 
the  altar      ...... 

Samans  sung  round  the  altar 
Day  of  Preparation  for  Soma-sacrifice 

Libations  on  Svayamatn««a 

Sprinkling  of  altar  with  sour  curds,  honey  and  gh 

Pravargya  ....... 

Leading  forward  of  Agni  to  the  Altar  . 

Oblations  of  ghee  on  udumbara  logs     . 

Lifting  of  log,  setting  forth,  Apratiratha  hymn 


across 


150,  156 
158 
163 
164 
169 
171 
172 


ee 


174 
177 
181 
182 
184 
187 
188 
189 
191 


CONTENTS. 


IX 


fire 


Setting  up  of  variegated  stone  on  Agnidhra  site 
Mounting  of  Fire-altar 
Milk-offering  on  firebrand    . 
Laying  down  of,  and  putting  logs  on,  Ahavaniya 
Oblations  thereon 
Installation  and  Consecration  of  Agni . 
Cakes  to  Vaijvanara  and  INIaruts  . 
Vasor  dhara,  or  shower  of  wealth 
Ardhendra  and  Graha  oblations  . 
Ya^wakratus        .... 
Oblations  to  Stomas  and  age-grades 
Kalpa  (prospering)  libations 
Va^aprasaviya  libations 

Partha  libations  .... 
Consecration  of  Sacrificer     . 

Rash/rabhrz't  oblations 

Oblations  on  head  of  chariot 

Yoking  of  chariot  with  oblations  of  air 

Runmatt  (lightsome)  oblations     . 

Arkajvamedha-sa/;aati  oblations  . 
Preparatory  Rites  of  Soma-sacrifice 

Building  of  Dhishwya  hearths 

Agnishomiya  (animal)  sacrifice     . 

Oblations  to  Regions  . 

Oblations  to  Divine  Quickeners  (devasii) 

Pajupuro</aja-offering 
Sutya,  or  Day  of  Soma-sacrifice  . 

Agniyoga,  or  yoking  of  Fire-altar 

Pressing  and  offering  of  Soma 

Unyoking  of  Fire-altar 

]\Iilk  for  fast-food 

Samish/aya^us  oblations 

Udayaniya,  and  off"ering  of  barren  cow 

Cake  to  Orderer  (Pra^4pati  and  the  sun) 

Oblations  to  goddesses  Anumati,  Raka,   Sinival 
Kuha 

Pajupuroc/aja  and    concluding   ceremonies   of  offerin 
of  barren  cow      .... 

Vaijvakarmawa  oblations 

Payasya-offering  to  Mitra  and  Varuwa  . 


1  an 


195 
198 

200 

202 

204 

207 

207 

213 

216 

217 

217 

220 

223 

225 

226 

229 

233 

235 

237 

239 
241 

241 
245 
245 
246 

248 

249 
249 
251 

252 

255 

257 
263 

264 

264 

265 
266 


270 


X 


CONTENTS. 


Rules  for  a  repeated  Agni>tayana 
Propitiatory  hymn  to  Indra  and  Agni 


PAGE 


TENTH  KA7V^Z>A. 

The  Mystery  of  the  Fire-altar 

The  triad — Fire-altar,  Mahad  uktham,  and  Mahavrata 

Parimad  samans  ..... 

Pra^apati  made  immortal     .... 

Layers  of  altar  partly  mortal  and  partly  immortal 

Agni/^ayana  includes  all  sacrifices 

Contraction  and  expansion  of  wings  of  altar  (bird) 

Dimensions  of  Fire-altar      .... 

Sevenfold  and  hundred  and  onefold  altars     . 

Time  for  building  the  altar  .... 

Number  of  Upasad-days      .... 

Pra^apati,  the  Altar  and  the  Year  (Time) 

The  metres  in  relation  to  Pra^apati 

Dhira    ^ataparweya    and    Mahajala    G^abala    on    the 

knowledge  of  Agni       .... 
Arum  on  the  mystery  of  the  Arka 
Mystic  import  of  the  Ya^us 
The    sacred    fire,    the    Arka,    the    one    Akshara,    the 

great  Brahman    ..... 
Pra^apati,    the    year,   is    Agni,    and   King    Soma,   the 

moon  ...... 

Trayi  vidya  (the  Vedas)      .... 

Pra^apati,  the  year,  as  Death 

The  Sacrificer  is  Pra^apati,  and  immortal     . 

Numbers  of  bricks  in  layers 

Session  of  a  thousand  years 

Mystic  import  of  Agni,  the  Fire-altar   . 

The  gold  plate  and  gold  man  as  sun  and  the  man  in 

the  sun        ...... 

Death,  the  man  in  the  right  eye,  and  the  man  in  the  sun 

Mind,  the  ultimate  cause  of  the  universe 

The  Fire-altar,  the  universe 

Kujri  Va^a.rravasa  on  the  construction  of  the  altar 

Ajvapati  Kaikeya  on  the  nature  of  Vaijvanara 


281 
281 
288 
290 
292 
296 
300 
305 

313 
316 

317 
321 

327 

331 
333 
336 

343 

349 
352 
356 
357 
358 
361 

363 

366 

371 
375 
381 
390 
393 


CONTENTS.  X 1 


PACE 

The  Agni-like,  Arka-like,  Uktha-like  Purusha        .         .     398 
The  true  Braliman,  the  Self,  the  golden  Purusha  .         .     400 
The  sacrificial  horse  (Pra_§-apati),  the  universe        .         .401 
Death,  the  ultimate  cause     .         .         .         .         .         .402 

Death,    the     Arka    and    Axvamedha,     conquered    by 

knowledge  ........     404 

Corrections        .........     405 


Transliteration  of  Oriental  Alphabets  adopted  for  the  Trans- 
lations of  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  East         .         .         -407 


INTRODUCTION. 

The  present  volume  completes  the  exposition  of  the 
Agni/^-ayana,  or  construction  of  the  sacred  Fire-altar. 
Whilst  to  the  general  reader  the  section  of  the  Brahmawa 
treating  of  this  ceremony,  and  extending  over  no  less  than 
five  of  its  fourteen  kaw^as— or  rather  more  than  one-third 
of  the  whole — will  probably  appear  the  least  inviting  part 
of  the  work,  a  special  interest  attaches  to  this  ceremony, 
and  the  dogmatic  explanation  of  its  details,  for  the  student 
of  Indian  antiquity.  The  complicated  ritual  of  the  Fire- 
altar,  as  has  been  pointed  out  before  \  does  not  seem  to 
have  formed  part  of  the  original  sacrificial  system,  but  was 
probably  developed  independently  of  it,  and  incorporated 
with  it  at  a  comparatively  recent  period.  There  seems, 
indeed,  some  reason  to  believe  that  it  was  elaborated  with 
a  definite  object  in  view,  viz.  that  of  making  the  external 
rites  and  ceremonies  of  the  sacrificial  cult  the  practical 
devotional  expression  of  certain  dominant  speculative 
theories  of  the  time.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  dogmatic 
exposition  of  no  other  part  of  the  sacrificial  ceremonial 
reflects  so  fully  and  so  faithfully  as  that  of  the  Agni/C-ayana 
those  cosmogonic  and  thcosophic  theories  which  form 
a  characteristic  feature  of  the  Brahmaz/a  period.  In  the 
present  work,  that  section  commences  with  a  cosmogonic 
account  so  elaborate  as  is  hardly  to  be  met  with  anywhere 
else  in  the  Brahma;/a  literature;  and  throughout  the 
course  of  performance  the  symbolic  import  of  its  details  is 


*  See  part  i,  introduction,  p.  xxxi. 


XIV  6'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

explained  here,  as  in  other  Brahma/^as,  on  the  Hnes  of  those 
cosmogonic  speculations. 

When,  towards  the  close  of  the  period  represented  by  the 
Vedic  hymns,  inquiring  minds  began  to  look  beyond  the 
elemental  erods  of  the  traditional  belief  for  some  ulterior 
source  of  mundane   Hfe  and  existence,  the  conception  of 
a  supreme,  primordial  being,  the  creator  of  the  universe, 
became  the  favourite  topic  of  speculation.    We  accordingly 
find   different    poets  of  that  age  singing  of  this   uncreate 
being  under  different  names, — they  call  him  Vii-vakarman, 
the  'All-worker';  or  Hira;/yagarbha,  the  '  golden  Embryo' ; 
or  Purusha,  the  '  Person ' ;    or   Ka,  the  '  Who  ?  '  ;  or  the 
heavenly  Gandharva  Vi^vavasu,  'All-wealth  ' ;  or  Pra^apati, 
the  '  Lord  of  Creatures.'    Or  they  have  recourse  to  a  some- 
what older  figure    of  the    Pantheon,   likewise   of  abstract 
conception,  and    call    him    Brahma;/aspati  \  the    Lord  of 
prayer    or   devotion  ;    a    figure    which     would    natural!}' 
commend  itself  to  the  priestly  mind,  and  which,  indeed,  in 
a  later  phase  of  Hindu  religion,  came  to  supply  not  only 
the  name  of  the  abstract,  impersonal  form  of  the  deity,  the 
world-spirit,  but  also  that  of  the  first  of  its  three  personal 
forms,  the  creator  of  the  Hindu  triad.     Amongst  these  and 
other  names  by  which  the  supreme  deity  is  thus  designated 
in  the  philosophic  hymns  of  the  7?/k  and  Atharva-veda,  the 
name  of  Pra^apati,  the  Lord  of  Creatures  or  generation, 
plays  a  very  important  part  in  the  immediately  succeeding 
period  of  literature,  viz.  that  of  the  Brahmawas. 

In  the  so-called  Purusha-hymn  [Kig-veda.  X,  90),  in  which 
the  supreme  spirit  is  conceived  of  as  ^/le  Person  or  Man 
(Purusha),  born  in  the  beginning,  and  consisting  of '  what- 
soever hath  been  and  whatsoever  shall  be,'  the  creation  of 
the  visible  and  invisible  universe  is  represented  as  originating 
from  an  'all-offered  '  sacrifice "  (ya^;7a)  in  which  the  Purusha 
himself  forms  the  offering-material  (havis),  or,  as  one  might 


'  Cf.  i^?g-veda  X,  22,  2. 

^  That  is  to  say,  a  sacrifice  at  which  not  only  portions  of  the  sacrificial  dish, 
or  the  victim,  are  offered  up  to  the  deities,  but  where  every  single  part  of  it  is 
offered. 


INTRODUCTION.  XV 


say,  the  victim.  In  this  primeval — or  rather  timeless, 
because  ever-proceeding — sacrifice,  Time  itself,  in  the  shape 
of  its  unit,  the  Year,  is  made  to  take  its  part,  inasmuch  as 
the  three  seasons,  spring,  summer,  and  autumn,  of  which  it 
consists,  constitute  the  ghee,  the  offering-fuel,  and  the 
oblation  respectively.  These  speculations  may  be  said  to 
have  formed  the  foundation  on  which  the  theory  of  the 
sacrifice,  as  propounded  in  the  Brahma//as,  has  been  reared. 
Pra^apati,  who  here  takes  the  place  of  the  Purusha,  the 
world-man,  or  all-embracing  Personality,  is  offered  up  anew 
in  every  sacrifice  ;  and  inasmuch  as  the  very  dismember- 
ment of  the  Lord  of  Creatures,  which  took  place  at  that 
archetypal  sacrifice,  was  in  itself  the  creation  of  the  universe, 
so  every  sacrifice  is  also  a  repetition  of  that  first  creative 
act.  Thus  the  periodical  sacrifice  is  nothing  else  than  a 
microcosmic  representation  of  the  ever-proceeding  destruc- 
tion and  renewal  of  all  cosmic  life  and  matter.  The  theo- 
logians of  the  Brahma;^as  go,  however,  an  important  step 
further  by  identifying  the  performer,  or  patron,  of  the 
sacrifice — the  Sacrificer — with  Pra^apati ;  and  it  is  this 
identification  which  may  perhaps  furnish  us  with  a  clue  to 
the  reason  why  the  authors  of  the  Brahma;^as  came  to  fix 
upon  '  Pra^apati '  as  the  name  of  the  supreme  spirit.  The 
name  '  Lord  of  Creatures  '  is,  no  doubt,  in  itself  a  perfectly 
appropriate  one  for  the  author  of  all  creation  and  generation ; 
but  seeing  that  the  pecuHar  doctrine  of  the  Purusha-sukta 
imparted  such  a  decisive  direction  to  subsequent  dogmatic 
speculation,  it  might  seem  rather  strange  that  the  name 
there  chosen  to  designate  the  supreme  being  should  have 
been  discarded,  only  to  be  employed  occasionally,  and  then 
mostly  with  a  somewhat  different  application  ^  On  the 
other    hand,    the    term    '  Pra^apati '    was     manifestly    a 

'  In  its  original  sense  it  occurs  at  the  beginning  of  the  Agni^ayana  section, 
VI,  I,  I,  2  ;,  in  connection  with  what  might  almost  be  regarded  as  an  exposi- 
tion of  the  Punisha-sukta.  The  seven  original  purushas  out  of  which  the 
Purusha  comes  to  be  compacted,  are  apparently  intended  to  account  for  the 
existence  of  the  seven  AVshis  (explained  in  the  Hrahmawas  as  representing  the 
vital  airs)  prior  to  the  creation  of  the  one  Purusha.  It  would  seem  that  they 
themselves  previously  composed  the  as  ytt  uncorporeal  Purusha. 


XVI  ^SATAPATHA-BRAHMAA^A. 

singularly  convenient  one  for  the  identification  of  the 
Sacrificer  with  the  supreme  '  Lord  of  Creatures '  ;  for, 
doubtless,  men  who  could  afford  to  have  great  and  costly- 
sacrifices,  such  as  those  of  the  5rauta  ceremonial,  performed 
for  them — if  they  were  not  themselves  Brahmans,  in  which 
case  the  term  might  not  be  inappropriate  either — would 
almost  invariably  be  '  Lords  of  Creatures,'  i.e.  rulers  of  men 
and  possessors  of  cattle,  whether  they  were  mighty  kings, 
or  petty  rulers,  or  landed  proprietors,  or  chiefs  of  clans.  It 
may  be  remarked,  in  this  respect,  that  there  is  in  the 
language  of  the  Brahma/ms  a  constant  play  on  the  word 
'  pra^a '"  (progenies),  which  in  one  place  means  '  creature '  in 
general,  whilst  in  another  it  has  the  sense  of  '  people, 
subjects,'  and  in  yet  another  the  even  more  restricted  one 
of  '  offspring  or  family.' 

How  far  this  identification  of  the  human  Sacrificer  with 
the  divine  Pra^apati  goes  back,  and  whether,  when  first 
adopted,  it  was  applied  at  once  to  the  whole  of  the  sacrificial 
system,  or  whether  it  rather  originated  with  a  certain 
restricted  group  of  ritualists  in  connection  with  some 
limited  portion  of  the  ceremonial  such  as  the  Agniy^ayana, 
and  became  subsequently  part  and  parcel  of  the  sacrificial 
theory,  it  would  probably  not  be  easy  to  determine.  As 
regards  the  symbolic  connection  of  the  Sacrificer  himself 
with  the  sacrifice,  there  can  at  any  rate  be  no  doubt  that  it 
was  an  essential  and  an  intimate  one  from  the  very  beginning 
of  the  sacrificial  practice.  When  a  man  offers  to  the  gods 
their  favourite  food,  it  is  in  order  to  please  them  and  to 
gain  some  special  object  of  his  own, — either  to  make  them 
strong  and  inclined  for  fighting  his  battles,  and  to  secure 
their  help  for  some  undertaking  of  his  or  against  some 
danger  by  which  he  is  threatened  ;  or  to  deprecate  their 
wrath  at  some  offence  he  knows  or  fancies  he  has  committed 
against  them  ;  or  to  thank  them  for  past  favours,  with  an 
eye,  it  may  be,  to  new  and  still  greater  favours  to  come. 
Gradually,  however,  the  connection  becomes  a  subtler  and 
more  mystic  one ;  the  notion  of  substitution  enters  into  the 
sacrifice :    it  is  in  lieu  of  his  own  self  that  man  makes  the 


INTRODUCTION.  XVU 


offering.  This  notion  is  a  familiar  one  to  the  thcolocrians 
' '  of  the  Brahma/^ras,  either  in  the  sense  that  the  oblation  is 
sent  up  to  the  gods  in  order  to  prepare  the  way  for  the 
Sacrificer,  and  secure  a  place  for  him  in  heaven  ;  or  in  the 
sense  that  along  with  the  burnt-offering  the  human  body 
of  the  Sacrificer  is  mystically  consumed,  and  a  new,  divine 
body  prepared  to  serve  him  in  the  celestial  abodes.  Inti- 
mately connected  with  this  latter  notion  we  find  another, 
introduced  rather  vaguely,  which  makes  the  sacrifice  a 
mystic  union  in  which  the  Sacrificer  generates  from  out  of 
the  Vedi  (f.),  or  altar-ground,  his  future,  divine  self.  In 
this  respect  Agni,  the  offering-fire,  also  appears  as  the 
mate  of  Vedi  ^  ;  but  it  will  be  seen  that  Agni  himself  is 
but  another  form  of  the  divine  and  the  human  Pra^apati. 

With  the  introduction  of  the  Pra^apati  theory  into  the 

sacrificial  metaphysics,  theological  speculation  takes  a  higher 

flight,  developing  features  not  unlike^  in  some  respects,  to 

those  of  Gnostic  philosophy.     From  a  mere  act  of  piety, 

and  of  practical,  if  mystic,  significance  to  the  person,  or 

persons,  immediately  concerned,  the  sacrifice — in  the  esoteric 

view  of  the  metaphysician,  at  least — becomes  an  event  of 

cosmic  significance.    By  offering  up  his  own  self  in  sacrifice, 

Pra^apati  becomes  dismembered  ;   and  all  those  separated 

limbs  and  faculties  of  his  come  to  form  the  universe, — all 

that   exists,  from  the  gods   and  Asuras  (the  children  of 

Father  Pra^apati)  down  to  the  worm,  the  blade  of  grass, 

and    the   smallest   particle   of  inert    matter.      It   requires 

a  new,  and  ever  new,  sacrifice  to  build  the  dismembered 

Lord  of  Creatures  up  again,  and  restore  him  so  as  to  enable 

him  to  offer  himself  up  again  and   again,  and  renew  the 

universe,  and  thus  keep  up  the  uninterrupted  revolution  of 

time  and  matter.     The  idea  of  the  dismembered  Pra^apati, 

and  of  this  or  that  sacrificial  act  being  required  to  complete 

and  replenish  him,  occurs  throughout  the  lucubrations  of 

the    Brahma;/as ;    but  in  the  exposition    of  the  ordinary 

forms  of  sacrifice,  this  element  can  hardly  be  considered  as 

'  See  I,  2,  3,  15-16.     From  the   woman  Vedi  (otherwise  representing  the 
earth)  creatures  generally  are  produced  ;  cf.  Ill,  5,  i,  11. 

[43]  b 


XVUl  ^-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 


one  of  vital  importance  ;  whilst  in  the  Agni/'ayana,  on  the 
contrary,  it  is  of  the  very  essence  of  the  whole  performance. 
Indeed,   it  seems  to    me  by  no   means,  unlikely  that  the 
Purusha-Pra^apati   dogma  was  first  practically  developed 
in   connection  with  the  ceremony  of  the  Fire-altar  \  and 
that,  along  with  the  admission  of  the  latter  into  the  regular 
sacrificial    ceremonial,    it  was  worked    into    the    sacrificial 
theory  generally.      In   the   Agni/'ayana    section    (Ka;/^as 
VI- X),  as  has  already  been  stated  ^,  .S'a;/rf'ilya  is  referred 
to  as  the  chief  authority  in  doctrinal  matters,  whilst  in  the 
remaining  portions  of  the  Brahmawa,  that  place  of  honour 
is  assigned  to  Ya^wavalkya.     Now,  it   may  be  worthy  of 
notice,  in   connection  with  this  question  of  the  Pra^apati 
dogma,  that  in  the  list  of  successive  teachers  ^  appended  to 
the  AgniZ-ayana  section,  the  transmission  of  the  sacrificial 
science — or  rather  of  the  science  of  the  Fire-altar,  for  the 
list  can  only  refer  to  that  section — is  traced  from  ^a;/^ilya 
upwards  to  Tura  Kavasheya,  who  is  stated  to  have  received 
it  from   Pra^apati  ;    the   Lord  of   Creatures,   on  his   part, 
having  received  it  from  the  (impersonal)  Brahman.     Does 
not  this  look  almost  like  a  distinct  avowal  of  5a7/^ilya  and 
his    spiritual    predecessors    being   answerable   for   having 
introduced  the  doctrine  of  the  identity  of  Pra^apati  and  the 
sacrifice  into  the  sacrificial   philosophy  ?     If  such  be  the 
case,  the  adaptation  of  this  theory  to   the  dogmatic  ex- 
planation of  the  other  parts  of  the  ceremonial,  as  far  as  the 
6"atapatha-Br4hma7^a  is  concerned,  might  be  supposed  to 
have   been   carried    out  about  the  time  of  Sa;;/^ivi-putra, 
when  the  union  of  the  two  lines  of  teachers  seems  to  have 
taken  place  "*.     But  seeing  that  the  tenth  Ka^^da.,  called  the 
Mystery,  or  secret  doctrine,  of  the  Fire-altar,  was  apparently 
not  at  first  included  in  the  sacrificial  canon  of  the  Va^a- 


^  VI,  2,  2,  21,  '  Tliis  performance  (of  the  AgniZ'ayana)  assuredly  belongs  to 
Pra^apati,  for  it  is  Pra^apati  he  undertakes  (to  construct)  by  this  performance.' 

"  Part  i,  introduction,  p.  xxxi. 

'  For  this  Vaw5a,  as  well  as  that  appended  to  the  last  book  of  the  Brahmawa, 
see  ibid.  p.  xxxiii,  note  i. 

*  Ibid.  p.  xxxiv ;  Max  Miiller,  History  of  Ancient  Sanskrit  Literature, 
P-  437- 


INTRODUCTION.  XIX 


saneyins',  the  mystic  speculations  in  which  that  section  so 
freely  indulges  would  seem  to  have  been  left  apart  from 
the  regular  canon,  along  with  other  floating  material  which 
was  not  considered  suitable  for  practical  purposes,  or 
indispensable  for  an  intelligent  appreciation  of  the  hidden 
import  of  the  sacrificial  rites. 

Once  granted  that  the  real  purport  of  all  sacrificial  per- 
formances is  the  restoration  of  the  dismembered  Lord  of 
Creatures,  and  the  reconstruction  of  the  All,  it  cannot  be 
denied  that,  of  all  ceremonial  observances,  the  building  of 
the  great  Fire-altar  was  the  one  most  admirably  adapted 
for  this  grand  symbolic  purpose.     The  very  magnitude  of 
the    structure; — nay,    its    practically    illimitable    extent^, 
coupled    with    the   immense   number   of   single   objects — • 
mostly  bricks  of  various  kinds — of  which  it  is  composed, 
cannot  but  offer  sufficiently  favourable  conditions  for  con- 
triving what  might  fairly  pass  for  a  miniature  representation 
of  at  least  the  visible  universe.     The  very  name  '  Agni,'  by 
which  the  Fire-altar  is  invariably  designated,  indicates  from 
the  very  outset  an  identification  of  cardinal  importance — 
that  of  Pra^apati  with  Agni,  the  god  of  fire,  and  the  sacri- 
fice.    It  is  a  natural  enough  identification  ;  for,  as  Pra^apati 
is  the  arch-sacrificer,  so  Agni  is  the  divine  sacrificer,  the 
priest  of  the  sacrifice.      Hence  the   constantly  occurring 
triad — Pra^'^apati,  Agni,  and  (the  human)  Sacrificer.     The 
identity  of  the  altar  and  the  sacred  fire  which  is  ultimately 
to  be  placed  thereon  is  throughout  insisted  upon.     Side  by 
side  with  the  forming  and  baking  of  the  bricks  for  the  altar 
takes  place  the  process  of  shaping  and  baking  the  fire-pan 
(ukha).     During  the  year  over  which  the  building  of  the 
altar  is  spread,  the  sacred  fire  is  carried  about  in  the  pan  by 
the  Sacrificer  for  a  certain  time  each  day.     In  the  same  way 
as  the  layers  of  the  altar  are  arranged  so  as  to  represent 
earth,  air,  and  heaven,  so  the  fire-pan  is  fashioned  in  such 
a  way  as  to  be  a  miniature  copy  of  the  three  worlds  ^.     But, 
while  this  identity  is  never  lost  sight  of,  it  is  not  an  absolute 

'  Ibid.  p.  xxxii.  2  See  X,  2,  3,  17-18  ;  2,  4,  i  seqq. ;  4,  3,  5-8. 

'  VI,  5,  2,  I  scq.;  VII,  i,  2,  7-9. 

b  2 


XX  ^-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 


one,  but  rather  one  which  seems  to  hold  good  only  for  this 
special  sacrificial  performance.     Though  it  may  be  that  we 
have  to  look  upon  this  identification  as  a  serious  attempt  to 
raise  Agni,  the  divine  priest,  to  the  position  of  a  supreme 
deity,   the  creator  of  the  universe,  such    a  design  seems 
nowhere  to  be  expressed  in  clear  and  unmistakeable  terms. 
Nor    are   the   relations  between    the   two   deities    always 
defined  consistently.     Pra^apati  is  the  god  above  all  other 
gods  ;  he  is  the  thirty-fourth  god,  and  includes  all  the  gods 
(which  Agni  does  likewise) ;  he  is  the  three  worlds  as  well 
as  the  fourth  world  beyond  them  ^     Whilst,  thus,  he  is  the 
universe,  Agni   is  the  child  of  the  universe,  the  (cosmic) 
waters  being  the  womb  from  which  he  springs  '\     Whence 
a  lotus-leaf  is  placed  at  the   bottom  of  the  fire-altar   to 
represent   the  waters  and  the   womb   from    which   Agni- 
Pra^apati  and  the  human  Sacrificer  are  to  be  born.     Agni 
is  both  the  father  and  the  son  of  Pra^apati :  '  inasmuch  as 
Pra^apati  created  Agni,  he  is  Agni's  father  ;  and  inasmuch 
as  Agni  restored  him,  Agni  is  his  father^.'     Yet  the  two 
are  separate  ;    for  Pra^apati  covets  Agni's  forms, — forms 
(such  as  Ijana,  the  lord  ;    Mahan   Deva//,  the  great  god  ; 
Pai-upati,  the  lord   of  beasts)  which   are   indeed  desirable 
enough  for  a  supreme  Lord  of  Creatures  to  possess,  and 
which  might  well  induce  Pra^apati  to  take  up  Agni  within 
his  own  self.     Though,  in  accordance  with  an  older  con- 
ception, Agni  is  still  the  light  or  regent  of  the  earth,  as 
Vayu,  the  wind,  is  that  of  the  air,  and  the  sun  that  of  the 
heavens  ;  it  is  now  explained  that  really  these  are  but  three 
forms  of  the  one  Agni,- — that  Agni's  splendour  in  heaven  is 
Aditya,  that  in  the  air  Vayu,  and  that  on  earth  the  (sacri- 
ficial) fire  ^.     When  Pra^apati  is  dismembered,  Agni  takes 
unto  himself  the  escaping  fiery  spirit  of  the  god  ;  and  when 
he  is  set  up  again,  Agni  becomes  the  right  arm,  as  Indra 
becomes  the  left  one,  of  the  Lord  of  Creatures.     Upon  the 
whole,  however,  the    peculiar  relations   between    the  two 
gods  may  perhaps  be  defined  best  in  accordance  with  the 


^  IV,  6, 1,  4.  ^  VI,  8, 2,  4-6. 

3  VI,  I,  2,  26.  *  VI,  7,  4,  4;  VII,  I,  I,  22-23. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXI 


passage  already  referred  to  : — Agni  is  created  by  Pra^apati^ 
and  he  subsequently  restores  Pra^apati  by  giving  up  his 
own  body  (the  fire-altar)  to  build  up  anew  the  dismembered 
Lord  of  Creatures,  and  by  entering  into  him  with  his  own 
fiery  spirit, — '  whence,  while  being  Pra^apati,  they  yet  call 
him  Agni.' 

The  shape  adopted  for  the  altar  is  that  of  some  large 
bird — probably  an  eagle  or  a  falcon — flying  towards  the 
east,  the  gate  of  heaven.  Not  that  this  is  the  form  in  which 
Pra^apati  is  invariably  conceived.  On  the  contrary,  he  is 
frequently  imagined  in  the  form  of  a  man,  and  symbolic 
features  are  often  applied  to  him  which  could  only  fit,  or 
would  best  fit,  a  human  body.  But,  being  the  embodiment  of 
all  things,  Pra^apati  naturally  possesses  all  forms  ;  whence 
the  shape  of  a  four-footed  animal  is  likewise  occasionally 
applied  to  the  altar  ^  It  was,  doubtless,  both  traditional 
imagery  and  practical  considerations  which  told  in  favour  of 
the  shape  actually  chosen.  Pra^apati  is  the  sacrifice  and 
the  food  of  the  gods  ^  ;  and  Soma,  the  drink  of  immortality 
and  at  the  same  time  the  Moon,  is  tJie  divine  food  or 
offering  kot'  l^oyJ]i\  the  uttama;//  havis  ^,  or  paramahuti  "*, 
or  supreme  oblation :  hence  Pra^apati  is  Soma  ^.  But 
Soma  was  brought  down  from  heaven  by  the  bird-shaped 
Gayatri  ;  and  the  sacrifice  itself  is  fashioned  like  a  bird  ^. 
In  one  passage  ',  certain  authorities  are  referred  to  as  making 
the  altar  (Agni)  take  the  form  of  a  bird  in  order  to  carry 
the  Sacrificer  to  heaven  ;  but  the  author  himself  there 
insists  dogmatically  on  the  traditional  connection  of  the 
altar  with  Pra^apati :  that  it  was  by  assuming  that  form 
that  the  vital  airs  became  Pra^apati  ^ ;    and  that  in  that 

*  See,  for  instance,  VIII,  i,  4,  3.  ^  V,  i,  i,  2. 

3  A'lg-veda  IX,  107,  i.  *  ^'at.  Br.  VI,  6,  3,  7. 

*  See,  for  instance,  VI,  2,  2,  16;  X,  4,  2,  i. 

*  IV,  I,  2,  25.  '  VI,  I,  2,  36  ;  cf.  XI,  4,  I,  16. 

'  This  can  only  refer  to  the  cosmological  statement  at  the  beginning  of  the 
same  Ka«^/a,  where  the  seven  A'/shis,  or  vital  airs,  are  said  to  have  combined  to 
form  the  bird-shaped  Purusha  or  Pra^apati.  Though  nothing  is  said  there 
of  their  having  themselves  been  shaped  like  birds,  this  might  perhaps  be  inferred 
from  the  use  of  the  term  '  purusha '  with  reference  to  them.  In  the  Purusha- 
siikta  nothing  whatever  is  said  of  a  birdlike  form,  either  in  regard  to  the  Rii\n%, 

b3 


XXll  6'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAA'A. 

form  he  created  the  gods  who,  on  their  part,  became 
immortal  by  assuming  the  birdhke  form — and  apparently 
flying  up  to  heaven,  which  would  seem  to  imply  that  the 
Sacrificer  himself  is  to  fly  up  to  heaven  in  form  of  the 
bird-shaped  altar,  there  to  become  immortal.  It  is  not, 
however,  only  with  the  Moon,  amongst  heavenly  luminaries, 
that  Pra^apati  is  identified,  but  also  with  the  Sun  ;  for  the 
latter,  as  we  have  seen,  is  but  one  of  the  three  forms  of  Agni, 
and  the  fire  on  the  great  altar  is  itself  the  Sun  ^ ;  whilst  the 
notion  of  the  sun  being  fashioned  like  a  bird  flying  through 
space  is  not  an  unfamiliar  one  to  the  poets  of  the  Vedic 
age.  More  familiar,  however,  to  the  authors  of  the  Brah- 
ma/^as,  as  it  is  more  in  keeping  with  the  mystic  origin  of 
Pra^^apati,  is  the  identification  of  the  latter,  not  with  the 
solar  orb  itself,  but  with  the  man  (purusha)  in  the  sun,  the 
real  shedder  of  light  and  life.  This  gold  man  plays  an 
important  part  in  the  speculations  of  the  Agnirahasya  ^, 
where  he  is  represented  as  identical  with  the  man  (purusha) 
in  the  (right)  eye — the  individualised  Purusha,  as  it  were ; 
whilst  his  counterpart  in  the  Fire-altar  is  the  solid  gold  man 
(purusha)  laid  down,  below  the  centre  of  the  first  layer,  on 
a  gold  plate,  representing  the  sun,  lying  itself  on  the  lotus- 
leaf  already  referred  to  as  the  womb  whence  Agni  springs. 
And  this  gold  man  in  the  altar,  then,  is  no  other  than 
Agni-Pra^apati  and  the  Sacrificer  :  above  him — in  the  first, 
third,  and  fifth  layers — lie  the  three  naturally-perforated 
bricks,  representing  the  three  worlds  through  which  he 
will  have  to  pass  on  his  way  to  the  fourth,  invisible,  world, 
the  realm  of  immortal  life.  We  thus  meet  here  again  with  the 
hallowed,  old  name  of  the  Lord  of  Being,  only  to  be  made 
use  of  for  new  mystic  combinations. 

As  the  personified  totality  of  all  being,  Pra^apati,  how- 
ever, not  only  represents  the  phenomena  and  aspects  of 
space,  but  also  those  of  time, — he  is  Father  Time.  But 
just  as,  in  the  material  process  of  building  up  the  Fire-altar, 
the  infinite  dimensions  of  space  require  to  be  reduced  to 

or  the  Purasha ;  the  latter  being,  on  the  contrary,  imagined  in  the  form  of 
a  gigantic  man. 

'  VI,  I,  2,  20;  3,  I,  15.  2  X,  5,  2,  I  seqq. 


INTRODUCTION.  xxiil 


finite  proportions,  so,  in  regard  to  time,  the  year,  as  the 
lowest  complete  revokition  of  time,  is  taken  to  represent 
the  Lord  of  Creation  : — he  is  Father  Year  ;  and  accordingly 
Agni,  the  Fire-altar,  takes  a  full  year  to  complete.  And, 
in  the  same  way,  Agni,  the  sacrificial  fire,  from  the  time  of 
his  being  generated  in  the  fire-pan,  as  the  womb,  requires 
to  be  carried  about  by  the  Sacrificer  for  a  whole  year,  to 
be  matured  by  him  before  the  child  Agni  can  be  born  and 
placed  on  the  Fire-altar.  The  reason  why  the  Sacrificer 
must  do  so  is,  of  course,  that  Agni,  being  the  child  of  the 
universe — that  is  of  Pra^'apati  and  the  Sacrificer, — the  latter, 
at  the  time  when  the  fire  is  kindled  in  the  fire-pan,  has,  as  it 
were,  to  take  Agni  within  his  own  self,  and  has  afterwards 
to  produce  him  from  out  of  his  own  self  when  mature. 

But  whilst,  in  regard  to  Agni-Pra^apati,  the  year  during 
which  the  altar  is  erected  represents  the  infinitude  of  time, 
to  the  mortal  Sacrificer  it  will  not  be  so  until  he  shall  have 
departed  this  life  ;  and,  as  a  rule,  he  would  probably  not  be 
anxious  there  and  then  to  end  his  earthly  career.  Nor  is 
such  an  effort  of  renunciation  demanded  of  him,  but,  on 
the  contrary,  the  sacrificial  theory  holds  out  to  the  pious 
performer  of  this  holy  ceremony  the  prospect  of  his  living 
up  to  the  full  extent  of  the  perfect  man's  life,  a  hundred 
years  ;  this  term  of  years  being  thus  recognised  as  another 
unit  of  time,  so  to  speak,  viz.  that  of  a  complete  lifetime. 
Yet,  be  it  sooner  or  be  it  later,  the  life  of  every  creature 
comes  to  an  end  ;  and  since  time  works  its  havoc  on  all 
material  existence,  and  carries  off  generation  after  genera- 
tion, the  Supreme  Lord  of  generation,  P'ather  Time,  as  he 
is  the  giver  of  all  life,  so  he  is  likewise  that  ender  of  all 
things — Death.  And  so  the  Sacrificer,  as  the  human 
counterpart  of  the  Lord  of  Creatures,  with  the  end  of  his 
present  life,  becomes  himself  Death, — Death  ceases  to  have 
power  over  him,  and  he  is  for  ever  removed  from  the  life  of 
material  existence,  trouble,  and  illusion,  to  the  realms  of 
light  and  everlasting  bliss. 

'  VII,  4,  hi. 


Xxiv  5'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 


And  here  we  get  the  Supreme  Lord  in  his  last  aspect ; 
nay,  his  one  true  and  real  aspect,  in  which  the  Sacrificer 
will  himself  come  to  share,— that  of  pure  intellectuality, 
pure  spirituality,— he  is  Mind :  such  is  the  ultimate  source 
of  being,  the  one  Self,  the  Purusha,  the  Brahman.     The 
author  of  the   Mystery  of  Agni  attempts  to  reveal  the 
process  of  evolution  by  which  this  one  true  Self,  through 
sacrifice  carried  on  by  means  of  the  Arka-fires  of  his  own 
innate  fervour  and  devotion,  comes  to  manifest  himself  in 
the    material    universe ;    and — as    the    sum  total    of   the 
wisdom  of  5aw^ilya— he  urges  upon  the  searcher  after  truth 
to   meditate  on  that    Self,   made   up   of   intelligence,  and 
endowed  with  a  body  of  spirit,  a  form  of  light,  and   an 
etherial  nature,  .  .  .  holding  sway  over  all  the  regions  and 
pervading  this  All,  being  itself  speechless  and  devoid  of 
mental  affects  ;— and  bids  him  believe  that  '  even  as  a  grain 
of  rice,  or  the  smallest  granule  of  millet,  so  is  the  golden 
Purusha  in  the  heart;    even    as    a   smokeless  light,  it   is 
greater  than  the  sky,  greater  than  the  ether,  greater  than 
the  earth,  greater  than  all  existing  things  ;  that  Self  of  the 
spirit  is  my  Self:    on  passing   away  from  hence  I  shall 
obtain  that  Self.     And,  verily,  whosoever  has  this  trust,  for 
him  there  is  no  uncertainty.' 

As  the  practical  application  of  the  Agni-Pra^apati  mys- 
tery to  the  sacrificial  ritual  consists  mainly  in  the  erection 
of  the  Fire-altar  and  the  ceremonies  connected  with  the  fire- 
pan, which  fell  almost  entirely  within  the  province  of  the 
Adhvaryu  priest,  it  is  naturally  in  his  text-books,  in  the 
Ya^ur-veda,  that  the  mystic  theory  has  become  fully 
elaborated.  Yet,  though  the  two  other  classes  of  priests, 
the  Hotr/s  and  Udgatr/s  \  take,  upon  the  whole,  a  com- 
paratively subsidiary  part  in  the  year's  performance  sym- 
bolising the  reconstruction  of  the  Lord  of  Creatures,  they 
have  found  another  solemn  opportunity,  subsequently  to 
the  completion  of  the  Fire-altar,  for  making  up  for  any 

*  They  take  part,  however,  in  such  ceremonies  as  the  doing  homage  to  the 
completed  Fire-altar  by  means  of  the  Parimads;  cf.  p.  288,  note  2  of  this 
volume. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXV 


shortcomings    in    this    respect,  viz.    the    Mahavrata,    or 
Great  Rite. 

The  brick  altar,  when  complete,  might  apparently  be 
used  at  once  for  any  kind  of  Soma-sacrifice^ ;  but  whether, 
if  this  were  to  be  merely  a  one-day  performance,  it  might 
be  made  a  Mahavrata  day  (in  which  case  it  must  be  an 
Agnish/oma),  seems  somewhat  doubtful  ■'^.  As  a  rule, 
however,  at  any  rate,  the  Mahavrata  was  performed  in 
connection,  not  with  an  ekaha  or  ahina,  but  with  a  sacrificial 
session  (sattra) ;  and  since  sacrificial  sessions,  it  would  seem, 
could  only  be  undertaken  by  Br^hmans  who  would  at  the 
same  time  be  the  Sacrificers— or  rather  Gr^liapatis  (masters 
of  the  house  or  householders)  as  the  Sattrins  are  called— 
and  their  own  officiating  priests,  the  Mahavrata  would  thus 
generally,  if  not  invariably,  be  reserved  for  Brahmans  =*. 
Indeed,  in  our  Brahma//a  (IX,  5,  2,  12-13)  the  rule  is  laid 
down  that  no  one  may  officiate  for  another  person  at  the 
Agni/^ayana,  the  Mahavrata  (saman),  and  the  Mahad 
Uktham ;  and  dire  consequences  are  predicted  in  the  case 
of  any  one  who  does  so;—*  for,  indeed,  these  (rites)  are  his 
divine,  immortal  body;  and  he  who  performs  them  for 
another  person,  makes  over  to  another  his  divine  body,  and 
a  withered  trunk  is  all  that  remains.'  And,  though  other 
authorities  are  then  referred  to  who  merely  prescribe,  as 
a  penance  for  those  who  have  officiated  at  these  ceremonies 
for  others,  that  they  should  either  perform  them  for  them- 
selves or  cause  others  to  perform  them  again,  the  author 

'  Our  Brahmawa,  X,  2,  5,  16,  says  that,  if  a  man  cannot  press  Soma  for 
a  year,  he  should  perform  the  Vii-va^it  Atiratra  with  all  the  Pr/sh/Z/as,  and  at 
that  performance  he  should  give  away  all  his  property.  These,  however,  were 
doubtless  by  no  means  the  only  alternatives. 

»  See,  however,  Sayawa  on  Ait.  Ar.  V,  i,  1,  i,  where  it  is  distinctly  stated 
that  the  Mahavrata  may  either  be  performed  as  an  Ekaha,  or  as  part  of  cither 
an  Ahina,  or  a  Sattra.— Katyayana,  XVI,  i,  2,  lays  down  the  rule  that  .though 
the  building  of  an  altar  is  not  a  necessary  condition  for  the  performance  of 
a  Soma-sacrifice)  it  is  indispensable  in  the  case  of  a  Soma-sacrifice  performed 
with  the  Mahavrata. 

=  That  is  to  say,  as  Sacrificers.  Persons  of  other  castes  of  course  took  part  in 
the  proceedings  of  this  day.  In  the  various  accounts  of  these  proceedings, 
no  alternative  ceremonies  seem  anywhere  referred  to  in  case  the  Sacrihcers 
themselves  belong  to  different  castes. 


XXVI  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

adheres  to  his  opinion  that  there  is  no  atonement  for  such 
an  offence.  There  can  be  no  doubt,  however,  that  the 
Agni/^ayana,  at  any  rate,  was  not  restricted  to  the  Brah- 
ma;/ical  order  ^  ;  and  this  passage,  if  it  does  not  merely 
record  a  former  sacrificial  practice,  has  probably  to  be 
understood  in  the  sense  that  one  must  not  officiate  for 
another  at  an  Agni/('ayana  which  is  to  be  followed  by  a 
Soma-sacrifice  with  the  Mahavrata.  If  the  Sattra  performed 
was  one  of  the  shortest  kind,  viz.  a  Dvada^aha,  or  twelve 
days'  performance — consisting  of  a  Daj-aratra,  preceded 
and  followed  by  an  Atir^tra — the  Mahavrata  was  inserted, 
it  would  seem,  between  the  Dai-aratra  and  the  final  Atiratra. 
Usually,  however,  the  Sattra,  like  the  Agni/('ayana,  lasted 
a  full  year  ;  the  favourite  form  being  the  '  Gavam  ayanam,' 
arranged,  in  accordance  with  the  progress  of  the  sun,  in  two 
halves,  an  ascending  and  a  descending  one,  divided  by 
a  central  day,  the  Vishuvat.  The  Mahavrata  was  per- 
formed on  the  last  day  but  one  of  the  year,  the  day  before 
the  final  Atiratra,  being  itself  preceded  (as  it  was  in  the 
case  of  the  Dvadaj-dha)  by  a  Da.yaratra,  or  ten  days'  per- 
formance. Now,  the  chief  feature  of  the  Mahavrata  day 
is  the  chanting, — in  connection  with  a  special  cup  of  Soma- 
juice,  the  Mahavratiya-graha — of  the  Mahavrata-saman  ^, 
as  the  Hotrz's  Pr/sh///a-stotra  at  the  midday  service ;  this 
chant  being  followed  by  the  recitation  of  the  Mahad  Uk- 
tham  3,  or  Great  Litany,  by  the  Hoiri.  The  special  feature, 
however,  of  these  two  ceremonies,  which  recalls  the  mystic 
Agni-Pra^apati  doctrine,  is  the  supposed  birdlike  form  of 
both  the  chant  and  the  litany.  The  Lord  of  Creatures,  as 
the  embodiment  of  all  things,  also  represents  the  '  trayi 
vidya,'  or  sacred  threefold  science,  the  Veda.  Accordingly, 
the  Stomas  (hymn-forms)  of  the  single  Samans  (chanted 

'  See,  for  instance,  SaX.  Br.  VI,  6,  3,  12-15,  where  directions  are  given  as  to 
certain  alternatives  of  performance  at  the  initiation  ceremony  in  case  the  Sacri- 
ficer  is  either  a  Kshatriya,  or  a  Purohita,  or  any  other  person.  The  ceremonies 
connected  with  the  consecration  of  the  Sacrificer  (IX,  3,  4,  1  seqq.)  point 
chiefly  to  a  king. 

'^  See  p.  282,  note  5  of  the  present  volume. 

^  See  notes  to  pp.  110-113  of  this  volume. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXVll 

verses)  composing  the  Stotra  or  hymn  of  praise  (the 
Mahavrata-saman),  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  verses  and 
metres  of  the  recited  litany,  on  the  other,  are  so  arranged 
and  explained  as  to  make  up  the  different  parts  of  a  bird's 
body.  It  need  scarcely  be  remarked  that,  whilst  in  the 
case  of  the  altar  the  task  of  bringing  out  at  least  a  rough 
resemblance  to  a  flying  bird  offered  no  great  difficulties,  it 
is  altogether  beyond  the  capabilities  of  vocal  performances 
such  as  the  chant  and  the  recitation  of  hymns  and  detached 
verses.  But  the  very  fact  that  this  symbolism  is  only 
a  matter  of  definition  and  make-believe,  makes  it  all  the 
more  characteristic  of  the  great  hold  which  the  Pra^apati 
theory  had  gained  upon  the  sacerdotal  mind. 

The  question  as  to  whether  these  compositions  them- 
selves might  seem  to  show  any  signs  of  comparatively 
recent  introduction  of  this  symbolism  requires  further  investi- 
gation before  it  can  be  answered.  Of  the  Mahavrata-saman 
we  have  virtually  a  single  version,  with  only  indications  of 
certain  substitutions  which  may  be  made  in  the  choice  of 
texts  and  tunes ;  the  parts  of  the  bird's  body  represented 
by  the  single  Samans  being  in  the  order— head,  right  wing, 
left  wing,  tail,  and  trunk.  Of  the  Mahad  Uktham,  on  the 
other  hand,  we  possess  two  different  versions,  those  of  the 
Aitareya  and  the  5ahkhayana  schools  of  Rig-veda  theo- 
logians. Both  of  them  start  with  the  hymns  representing 
the  trunk  of  the  bird  ;  but  otherwise  there  is  so  marked 
a  difference  between  them,  both  as  to  arrangement  and  the 
choice  of  verses  and  hymns,  that  it  seems  pretty  clear  that, 
whilst  there  must  have  existed  already  a  certain  traditional 
form  of  the  litany  when  these  two  schools  separated,  it  was 
not  yet  of  a  sufficiently  settled  character  to  prevent  such 
serious  discrepancies  to  arise  as  those  exhibited  by  the  two 
rituals.  This  point  being,  however,  of  too  technical  a  nature 
to  be  entered  upon  in  this  place,  its  further  investigation 
must  be  reserved  for  some  other  opportunity. 


DATAPATH  A-BRAHMAA^A. 

EIGHTH    KAJVDA. 


THE  BUILDING  OF  THE  SACRED  FIRE-ALTAR 

(continued). 


THE   CONSTRUCTION   OF   THE   FIRST    LAYER 

(continued). 

First  Adhyaya.     First  Brahmaa'a. 

I.    He    lays   down    the    Pra72abh  r/ta//    (breath- 
holders)  '  :    now,   the   Pra;^abhr/ta/^  being  the  vital 

^  The  construction  of  the  first  of  the  five  layers  of  the  ahar 
which,  as  far  as  the  special  bricks  are  concerned,  is  now  nearing 
its  completion,  may  be  briefly  recapitulated  here.  The  altar  (agni) 
is  constructed  in  the  form  of  a  bird,  the  body  (atman)  of  which 
cons^ists  of  a  square,  usually  measuring  four  man's  lengths,  or  forty 
feet  (Indian  =  c.  30  ft.  Engl.)  on  each  side.  The  ground  of  the 
'  body '  having  been  i)loughed,  watered,  and  sown  with  seeds  of  all 
kinds  of  herbs,  a  square  mound,  the^so-called  utiaravedi,  measuring 
a  yuga  (yoke=7  ft.  Ind.)  on  each  side,  is  thrown  up  in  the  middle 
of  the  'body,'  and  the  whole  of  the  latter  then  made  level  with  it. 
In  the  centre  of  the  '  body '  thus  raised,  where  the  two  '  spines ' — 
connecting  the  middle  of  each  of  the  four  sides  of  the  square  with 
that  of  the  opposite  side — meet,  the  priest  puts  down  a  lotus-leaf, 
and  thereon  the  gold  plate  (a  symbol  of  the  sun)  which  the  Sacrificer 
wore  round  his  neck  during  the  time  of  initiation.  On  this  plate 
he  then  lays  a  small  gold  figure  of  a  man  (representing  Agni-Pra- 
ji^apati,  as  well  as  the  Sacrificer  himself),  so  as  to  lie  on  his  back 
with  the  head  towards  the  east;  and  beside  him  he  places  two 
offering-spoons,  one  on  each  side,  filled  with  ghee  and  sour  curds 

[43]  B 


i-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAA^A. 


airs,  it  is  the  vital  airs  he  thereby  bestows  upon 
(Agni).  He  lays  them  down  in  the  first  layer  ; — 
that  which  is  the  first  layer  is  the  forepart  (ground- 
part)  of  Agni  :  it  is  thus  in  front  that  he  puts  (into 
Agni)  the  vital  airs,  whence  there  are  (in  creatures) 
these  (orifices  of  the)  vital  airs  in  front. 

respectively.  Upon  the  man  he  then  places  a  brick  with  naturally- 
formed  holes  in  it  (or  a  porous  stone),  a  so-called  Svayam-atr/;/«a 
(self-perforated  one),  of  which  there  are  three  in  the  altar,  viz.  in 
the  centre  of  the  first,  third,  and  fifth  layers,  supposed  to  represent 
the  earth,  air,  and  sky  respectively,  and  by  their  holes  to  allow  the 
Sacrificer  (in  efiigy)  to  breathe,  and  ultimately  to  pass  through  on 
his  way  to  the  eternal  abodes.  On  this  stone  he  lays  down  a  plant 
of  durva  grass — with  the  root  lying  on  the  brick,  and  the  twigs 
hanging  down — meant  to  represent  vegetation  on  earth,  and  food 
for  the  Sacrificer.  Thereupon  he  puts  down  in  front  (east)  of  the 
central  stone,  on  the  '  spine,'  a  Dviya^us  brick  ;  in  front  of  that,  on 
both  sides  of  the  spine,  two  Reta^si^;  then  in  front  of  them,  one 
Vi^yva^yotis ;  then  again  two  7?/tavya^;  and  finally  the  Asha- 
dhk,  representing  the  Sacrificer's  consecrated  consort.  These 
bricks,  each  of  which  is  a  pada  (foot,  Ind.)  square,  occupy  nearly 
one-third  of  the  line  from  the  centre  to  the  middle  of  the  front  side 
of  the  '  boily '  of  the  altar.  South  and  north  of  the  Ashaa'/za, 
leaving  the  space  of  two  bricks,  he  places  a  live  tortoise,  facing  the 
gold  man,  and  a  wooden  mortar  and  pestle  respectively.  On  the 
mortar  he  places  the  ukha,  or  fire-pan,  filled  with  sand  and  milk; 
and  thereon  the  heads  of  the  five  victims,  after  chips  of  gold  have 
been  thrust  into  their  mouths,  nostrils,  eyes,  and  ears.  At  each  of 
the  four  ends  of  the  two  '  spines'  he  then  puts  down  five  Apasya// 
bricks,  the  middle  one  lying  on  the  spine  itself,  with  two  on  each 
side  of  it.  The  last  set  of  five  bricks,  those  laid  down  at  the  north 
(or  left)  end  of  the  'cross-spine,'  are  also  called  A'/zandasya//  by  the 
Brahma«a.  He  now  proceeds  to  lay  down  the  Prawabhr/ta^, 
meant  to  represent  the  orifices  of  the  vital  airs,  in  five  sets  of  ten 
bricks  each.  The  first  four  sets  are  placed  on  the  four  diagonals 
connecting  the  centre  with  the  four  corners  of  the  body  of  the  altar, 
beginning  from  the  corner  {}  or,  according  to  some,  optionally  from 
the  centre),  in  the  order  S.E.,  N.W.,  S.W.,  N.E. ;  the  fifth  set  being 
then  laid  down  round  the  central  stone  at  the  distance  (or,  on  the 
range)  of  the  reta^si>^  bricks.      See  the  diagram  at  p.  17. 


VIII    KANDA,    I    ADHYAYA,    I    BRAHMA^A,    4. 


2.  He  lays  them  down  by  ten  and  ten,  for  there 
are  ten  vital  airs  ;  and  even  though  '  ten-ten '  may 
mean  many  times,  here  they  mean  only  ten.  Five 
times  he  puts  on  ten  (bricks)  each  time;  for  it  is 
those  five  (kinds  of  sacrificial)  animals  he  bestows, 
and  there  are  ten  vital  airs  in  each  animal  :  upon 
all  of  them  he  thus  bestows  the  vital  airs.  He  lays 
down  (the  bricks)  so  as  not  to  be  separated  from 
the  animals  :  he  thus  bestows  vital  airs  not  sepa- 
rated from  the  animals.  He  lays  them  down  on 
every  side  :  on  every  side  he  thus  bestows  on  them 
(orifices  of)  the  vital  airs. 

3.  And  again  why  he  lays  down  the  Pra;/abhma//. 
PVom  Pra^^apati,  when  relaxed  (by  producing  crea- 
tures), the  vital  airs  departed.  To  them,  having 
become  deities,  he  spake,  '  Come  ye  to  me,  return 
ye  unto  me  that  wherewith  ye  have  gone  out  of 
me!' — 'Well  then,  create  thou  that  food  which  we 
will  await  here  looking  on  ! ' — '  Well  then,  let  us  both 
create!' — 'So  be  it!' — So  both  the  final  airs  and  Pra- 
^apati  created  that  food,  these  Pra/zabhr/t  (bricks). 

4.  In  front  (of  the  altar)  he  lays  down  (ten  bricks\ — 
the  first)  with  (Va^^.  S.  XIII,  54),  'This  one  in 
front,  the  Existent,' — in  front,  doubtless,  is  Agni ; 
and  as  to  why  he  speaks  of  him  (as  being)  '  in  front,' 
it  is  because  they  take  out  the  fire  (from  the  Gar- 
hapatya)  towards  the  front,  and  attend  on  Agni 
towards  the   front  -.      And  as  to  why  he  says  '  the 

^  Whilst  standing  in  front  (east)  of  the  ahar,  he  puts  down  the 
first  set  of  ten  bricks  on  the  line  from  the  south-west  corner  (or 
right  shoulder)  of  the  altar  towards  the  centre.  The  formulas  with 
which  each  set  of  ten  bricks  are  deposited  are  spread  over  three 
paragraphs,  the  first  of  which  gives  that  of  the  first  brick,  the  second 
those  for  two  to  eight,  the  ihiid  for  the  last  two. 

^  Viz.  in  taking  out  ihe  fire  from  the  Garhapatya  and  transferring 

B  2 


^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAA'A. 


existent  (bhuva),'  Agni  is  indeed  the  existent,  for  it 
is  through  Agni  that  everything  exists  (bhu)  here. 
Agni,  indeed,  having  become  the  breath,  remained 
in  front  ^  :  it  is  that  very  form  ^  he  now  bestows 
(on  Agni). 

5.  [The  others  with]/ His,  the  Existent's  son, 
the  Breath,' — from  out  of  that  form,  fire,  he  (Pra- 
^•apati)  fashioned  the  breath; — 'Spring,  the  son  of 
the  breath,' — from  out  of  the  breath  he  fashioned 
the  spring-season^; — 'The  Gayatri,  the  daughter 
of  the  Spring,' — from  out  of  the  spring-season  he 
fashioned  the  Gayatri  metre; — 'From  the  Gayatri 
the  Gayatra,' — from  out  of  the  Gayatri  metre  he 
fashioned  the  Gayatra^  hymn-tune; — 'From  the 
Gayatra  the  \Jp3.77isu,' — from  out  of  the  Gayatra 
hymn -tune    he    fashioned    the    Upa;;^i"u-graha  ^ ; — 


il  to  the  Ahavaniya,  as  well  as  in  appioacbing  the  sacrificial  fire  for 
offerings.  It  should  also  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  altar  (agni)  is 
built  in  form  of  an  eagle  flying  towards  the  east,  or  front. 

^  See  VII,  5,  I,  7,  'The  breath  is  taken  in  from  the  front  back- 
wards.'— In  the  text  '  prawo  hagnir  bhutva  purastat  tasthau,'  I  take 
'  prawa/i '  to  be  the  predicate. 

^  At  VII,  4,  I,  16,  the  vital  air  is  called  Pra^dpati's  (Agni's) 
pleasing  form  (or  part). 

^  For  a  similar  connection  of  the  East  with  the  Gayatri,  the 
Rathantara,  the  Trivr/t,  the  Spring,  and  the  Brahman  (priesthood) 
see  V,  4,  I,  3,  (part  iii,  p.  91). 

*  The  Gayalra-saman  is  the  simplest,  and  by  far  the  most 
common  of  all  hymn-tunes.  It  is  especially  used  in  connection 
with  the  trivrzt-stoma,  or  nine-versed  hymn,  and  is  invariably  em- 
ployed for  the  Bahishpavamana-stotra.  It  is  also  the  tune  of  the 
first  triplet  both  of  the  Madhyandina  and  Arbhava-pavamana  ;  as 
well  as  for  all  the  four  A^ya-stotras. 

^  See  part  ii,  pp.  238  seqq.,  where  this  soma-cup  is  repeatedly 
connected  with  the  Gayatri.  Though  its  pressing  is  performed  by 
three  turns  of  eight,  eleven,  and  twelve  beatings  respectively, 
representing  the  three  chief  metres,  it  is  expressly  stated  (IV,  i,  i,  14) 


VIII    KANDA,    I    ADIIVAYA,    I    IJRAHMAiVA,    6.  5 

'  F'rom  the  Upaw.^u  the  Trivr/t,' — from  out  of 
the  Upawni-graha  he  fashioned  the  nine-versed 
hymn-form; — 'From  the  Trivr/t  the  Rathan- 
tara,' — from  out  of  the  Triv/-?t-stoma  he  fashioned 
the  Rathantara-p/'/sh//^a  \ 

6.  'The  i^/shi  Vasish///a -,' — the  Rish'i  Vasi- 
sh///a,  doubtless,  is  the  l^reath  :  inasmuch  as  it  is 
the  chief  (thing)  therefore  it  is  Vasish///a  (the  most 
excellent)  ;  or  inasmuch  as  it  abides  (with  living 
beings)  as  the  best  abider  (vastr/),  therefore  also  it 
is  Vasish///a. — 'By  thee,  taken  by  Pra^^apati,' — 
that  is.  '  by  thee,  created  by  Pra^apati,' — '  I  take 
breath  for  my  descendants  (and  people)!' — 
therewith  he  introduced  the  breath  from  the  front. 
Separately  he  lays  down  (these  ten  bricks) :  what 
separate  desires  there  are  in  the  breath,  those  he 
thereby  lays  into  it.  Only  once  he  settles  them  ^ : 
he  thereby  makes  it  one  breath  ;  but  were  he  to 
setde  them  each  separately,  he  assuredly  would  cut 
the  breath  asunder.  This  brick  is  trivr/t  (three- 
fold) :  the  formula,  the  settling,  and  the  sudadohas  *, 
that  is  threefold,  and  threefold  is  Agni, — as  great  as 


that  lie  wlio  is  desirous  of  obtaining  holiness,  should  press  eight 
times  at  each  turn. 

'  For  this  and  the   oiher  P/7sh//ia-sainans  sec  part  iii,  introd. 

pp.  xvi,  XX  seqq. 

■^  In  Taitt.  S.  IV,  3,  2.  i,  this  formula  is  connecte.l  with  the 
preceding  one, — '  from  the  Rathantara  (was  produced)  the  7?/shi 
Vasish///a.'  Similarly  in  the  corresponding  passages  of  the  subsequent 
sets  of  bricks. 

^  The  sadana,  or  settling,  consists  in  the  formula,  'By  that 
deity,  Angiras-like,  lie  thou  steady!'  being  pronounced  over  the 
bricks.     See  VI,  i,  2,  28. 

^  For  the  sudadohas  verse,  the  pronunciation  of  which,  together 
with  the  '  settling,'  constitutes  the  two  necessary  (nitya)  ceremonies, 
see  part  iii,  p.  307. 


DATAPATH  A-BRAHMAA^A. 


Agni  is,  as  great  as  is  his  measure,  so  much  he  lays 
down  (on  the  altar)  by  so  doing. 

7.  And  on  the  right  (south)  side  \  with  (Va^.  S. 
XIII,  55),  'This  one  on  the  right,  the  all- 
worker,' — the  all-worker  (vii"vakarman),  doubtless,  is 
this  Vayu  (the  wind)  who  blows  here,  for  it  is  he 
that  makes  everything  here  ;  and  because  he  speaks 
of  him  as  (being)  '  on  the  right,'  therefore  it  is  in  the 
south  that  he  blows  most.  Vayu,  indeed,  having 
become  the  mind,  remained  in  the  right  side  (of  the 
body) :  it  is  that  form  (part)  he  now  bestows  (on 
Agni). 

8.  '  His,  the  all-worker's  child,  the  Mind,' — 
from  out  of  that  (all-working)  form,  the  wind,  he 
fashioned  the  mind;— 'the  summer,  the  son  of 
the  mind,' — from  out  of  the  mind  he  fashioned  the 
summer  season^; — 'the  Trish/ubh,  the  daughter 
of  Summer,' — from  out  of  the  summer  season  he 
fashioned  the  Trish/ubh  metre  ; — 'from  the  Trish- 
/ubh  the  Sv&ra  tune,' — from  out  of  the  Trish/ubh 
metre  he   created   the   Svara  hymn-tune^; — 'from 

^  Whilst  standing  on  the  right  (south)  side  of  the  altar  he  lays 
down  the  third  set  of  ten  Pra«abhr?'ta//,  viz.  those  on  the  diagonal 
from  the  south-west  corner  (or  right  thigh)  towards  the  centre. 
Whilst,  in  the  actual  performance,  these  bricks  are  only  laid  down 
after  those  referred  to  in  paragraphs  1-3  of  the  next  Brahmawa, 
the  author,  in  his  explanation  of  the  formulas,  follows  the  course  of 
the  sun  from  left  to  right. 

^  For  a  similar  combination  of  the  south  with  the  Trish/ubh 
metre,  the  Br/hat-saman,  the  Pa;7/('adai'a-stoma,  the  summer  season, 
and  the  Kshatra,  see  V,  4,  i,  4  (part  iii,  p.  91). 

^  Svara-saman  is  called  a  chanted  verse  which  has  no  special 
concluding  nidhana,  or  finale,  but  in  which  the  svarita  (circumflex), 
or  first  rising  then  falling  pitch  (e.g.,  f-g-f)  of  the  final  vowel,  takes 
the  place  of  the  finale ;  whence  '  svara '  is  often  explained  by 
'  svaranidhana,'  i.e.  having  the  svara  (svarita)  for  its  nidhana.      See 


VIII    KANDA,    I    ADIIYAVA,    I    BRAHMAA^A,    9.  7 

the  Svara  the  Antaryama/ — from  out  of  the 
Sv^ra-saman  he  fashioned  the  Antaryama-graha ; — ■ 
*from  the  Antaryama  the  Pa/^/^adai-a,' — from 
out  of  the  Antaryama-cup  he  fashioned  the  fifteen- 
versed  hymn-form; — 'from  the  Pa/^/^ada^-a  the 
Brz'hat,' — from  out  of  the  Pa;7/'adai'a-stoma  he 
fashioned  the  B;Vhat-p;'/sh///a. 

9.  'The^zshi  Bharadva^a,' — thejRish'i  Bharad- 
va^a,  doubtless,  is  the  mind  ; — '  va^a  '  means  '  food,' 
and  he  who  possesses  a  mind,  possesses  (bharati) 
food,  '  vac^a  ;'  therefore  the  Rish'i  Bharadva^a  is  the 
mind. — 'By  thee,  taken  by  Pra^apati,' — that  is, 
*  by  thee,  created  by  Pra^^apati ;' — '  I  take  the  mind 
for  my  descendants!' — therewith  he  introduced 
the  mind  from  the  right  side.  Separately  he  lays 
down  (these  ten  bricks):  what  separate  desires  there 
are  in  the  mind,  those  he  thereby  lays  into  it.  Only 
once  he  settles  them  :  he  thereby  makes  it  one 
mind ;  but  were  he  to  settle  them  each  separately, 

Pa«/('.  Br.  IX,  3,  1 1,  where  a  svara-saman  is  prescribed  in  case  the 
Udgat/'/s  have  previously  committed  an  excess  in  their  chanting. 
The  last  tristich  of  the  Madhyandina-pavamanastotra  of  the  Agni- 
sh/oma,  the  Au^ana-saman  (to  Sama-v.,  vol.  ii,  pp.  27-29),  is  chanted 
in  this  way,  probably  in  order  to  make  good  the  excess  committed 
in  the  preceding  triplet,  the  Yaudh%aya  (ii,  pp.  25,  26),  in  which  each 
verse  is  chanted  with  three  nidhanas,  one  at  the  end,  and  two  inserted 
inside  the  saman.  La/y.  ^"raulas.  VI,  9,  6,  the  svara-samans  thus 
treated  are  called  '  padanusvarawi ; '  whilst  those  with  which  the 
musical  syllables  'ha-i'  are  used  with  a  similar  effect,  are  called 
'haikarasvarawi.'  As  an  instance  of  the  former,  the  Auj-ana  (Sama-v., 
vol.  iii,  p.  8 1)  is  adduced,  and  of  the  latter  the  Vamadevya  (iii,  p.  89). 
It  is  not  only  the  final  syllable  of  a  saman,  however,  that  may  be 
modulated  in  this  way,  but  also  that  of  a  musical  section  of  the 
saman  ;  cf.  Pa/7X'.  Br.  X,  12,  2,  where  the  Udgiiha  is  to  be  so  treated 
to  make  up  for  the  preceding  Prastava,  chanted  without  a  Slo!)ha. 
Sacrificial  calls  such  as  the  '  Svaha '  and  '  Vasha/'  are  also  modulated 
in  this  way,'  ib.  VH,  3,  26;  XI,  5,  26. 


^-ATAPATHA-ERAHMAiVA. 


he  assuredly  would  cut  asunder  the  mind.  This 
brick  is  threefold  :  the  meaning  of  this  has  been 
explained. 

Second  BRAHMAiVA. 

1.  And  at  the  back  (western  part  of  the  altar), 
with  (Va;'-.  S.  XIII,  56),  'This  one  behind,  the 
all-embracer;'— the  all-embracer,  doubtless,  is 
yonder  sun,  for  as  soon  as'  he  rises,  all  this  em- 
bracing space  comes  into  existence.  And  because 
he  speaks  of  him  as  (being)  'behind,'  therefore  one 
sees  him  only  when  he  goes  towards  the  back 
(west).  The  Sun,  indeed,  having  become  the  eye, 
remained  behind:  it  is  that  form  he  now  bestows 
(on  Agni). 

2.  'His,  the  all-embracer's  child,  the  Eye,'— 
from  out  of  that  (all-embracing)  form,  the  Sun,  he 
fashioned  the  eye; — 'the  rains,  the  offspring 
of  the  eye,' — from  out  of  the  eye  he  fashioned  the 
rainy  season  ; — '  the  6Pagati,  the  daughter  of  the 
rains,' — from  out  of  the  rainy  season  he  fashioned 
the  6^agati  metre; — 'from  the  G^agati  the  Rik- 
sama,' — from  out  of  the  G'agati  metre  he  fashioned 
the   i?/ksama  hymn-tune-; — 'from  the  7?/ksama 


'   Or,  perhaps,  '  only  when  '  (yada-eva). 

"^  No  explanation  of  this  saman  has  been  found  anywhere. 
Sayawa,  on  the  corresponding  formula,  Taitt.  S.  IV,  3,  4,  2  (where 
the  term  is  spelt  nlishama),  merely  remarks  that  it  is  'a  kind  of 
saman.'  The  meaning  of  the  term  '  similar  to  a  rik '  would  seem 
to  indicate  a  hymn-tune  involving  little,  or  no,  modification  of  the 
text  chanted  to  it.  At  V,  4,  i,  5  it  is  the  Vairiapa-saman  which 
(together  with  the  Gagati,  the  Saptada^a-stoma,  the  rainy  season, 
and  the  Ws)  is  in  this  way  connected  with  the  West.  Now  the 
textual  parts  of  the  Pa«/^anidhanaw/  Vairupam  (Sama-v.,  vol.  v, 
PP-    387,    575-6),    ordinarily    used    as    a    p/vsh/Z/a-saman,    show 


VIII    KANDA,    I    ADHYAYA,    2    BRAIIMAA'A,    4,  9 

the  6^11  kra,' — from  out  of  the  /i^/k.sama-saman  he 
fashioned  the  ^'ukra-graha  ; — '  from  the  ^9iikra  the 
Saptada  5a,' — from  out  of  the  .Sukra  cup  he 
fashioned  the  seventeen-versed  hymn-form; — 'from 
the  Saptada.<ra  the  Vairupa,' — from  out  of  the 
Saptada.<ra-stoma  he  fashioned  the  Vairupa-pr/sh///a. 

3.  'The  /?2shi  6^amadagni,' — the  i^/shi  6'ama- 
dagni,  doubtless,  is  the  eye  :  inasmuch  as  thereby 
the  world  of  the  living  (^agat)  sees  and  thinks, 
therefore  the  AVshi  6^amadagni  is  the  eye. — '  By 
thee,  taken  by  Pra^apati,' — that  is,  'by  thee, 
created  by  Pra,fapati,' — '  I  take  the  eye  for  my 
descendants,'  therewith  he  introduced  the  eye 
from  behind.  Separately  he  lays  down  (these  ten 
bricks):  what  separate  desires  there  are  in  the  eye 
those  he  thereby  lays  into  it.  Only  once  he  settles 
them  :  he  thereby  makes  this  eye  one  ;  but  were  he 
to  settle  them  each  separately,  he  assuredly  would 
cut  the  eye  asunder.  This  is  a  threefold  brick  :  the 
meaning  of  this  has  been  explained. 

4.  And  on  the  left  (upper,  north)  side,  with  (Va^^. 
S.  XIII,  57),  'This,  on  the  upper  side,  heaven,' 
— in  the  upper  sphere,  doubtless,  are  the  regions 
(quarters)  ;  and  as  to  why  he  speaks  of  them  as 
being  '  on  the  upper  (left)  side,'  the  regions,  indeed, 

harilly  any  modifications  on  the  original  verses  (Sama-v.,  vol.  ii, 
p.  278),  even  less  so  indeed  than  the  simple  Vairupa-saman  (Sama-v., 
vol.  i,  p.  572),  and  possibly  'nlcsama'  (if  it  does  not  apply  to 
a  whole  class  of  samans)  may  be  another  name  for  the  Vairijpa  (of 
which  there  are  two  other  forms,  Sama-v.,  vol.  i,  pp.  425,  438)  in  its 
simplest  form.  The  Vairupa,  in  its  pr/sh///a  form,  would  in  that 
case,  indeed,  have  originated  from  the  ^/ksama-saman.  It  is  true, 
however,  that  there  is  no  special  connection  between  the  other 
Pr/shMa-samans  and  the  respective  hymn-tune  with  which  they 
are  symbolically  connected  in  the  foregoing  formulas. 


lO  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMANA. 

are  above  everything  here.  And  as  to  why  he 
says,  '  heaven  (or,  the  light),'  the  regions,  indeed,  are 
the  heavenly  world  (or  world  of  light).  The  regions, 
having  become  the  ear,  remained  above  :  it  is  that 
form  he  now  bestows  (on  Agni). 

5.  '  Its,  heaven's,  child,  the  Ear,' — from  out  of 
that  form,  the  regions,  he  fashioned  the  ear; — 'the 
autumn,  the  daughter  of  the  ear,' — from  out  of 
the  ear  he  fashioned  the  autumn  season; — 'Anush- 
/ubh,  the  daughter  of  the  autumn,' — from  out  of 
the  autumn  season  he  fashioned  the  Anush/ubh 
metre; — 'from  the  Anush/ubh  the  Al^a,' — from 
out  of  the  Anush/ubh  metre  he  fashioned  the  Ai^a- 
saman^; — 'from  the  Ai^'a  the  Manthin,' — from 
out  of  the  Ai^a-saman  he  fashioned  the  Manthin 
cup  ; — '  from  the  Manthin  the  Jikav'ims3.,'—(rom 
out  of  the  Manthi-graha  he  fashioned  the  twenty- 
one-versed  hymn-form; — 'from  the  F.ka.vimsa. 
the  Vaira^a,' — from  out  of  the  Ekavi?//^a-stoma 
he  fashioned  the  Vaira^a-prz'sh///a. 

6.  'The  y?/shi  Vii-vamitra,' — the  i?2shi  Vi^-va- 
mitra  ('all-friend'),  doubtless,  is  the  ear:  because 
therewith  one  hears  in  every  direction,  and  because 
there  is  a  friend  (mitra)  to  it  on  every  side,  therefore 
the  ear  is  the  Tt'/shi  Vi^vamitra. — '  By  thee,  taken 
by  Pra^apati,' — that  is,  'by  thee,  erected  by  Pra- 
^apati ;' — 'I  take  the  ear  for  my  descendants,' 

^  Aic/a-samans  are  those  samans  which  have  the  word  '  ida. '  for 
their  nidhana,or  chorus.  Such  samans  are, e.g.  the  Vairupa  (Sama-v., 
vol.  V,  p.  387)  and  the  Raurava  (iii,  83),  the  latter  of  which  forms 
the  central  saman  of  the  Madhyandina-pavamana-stotra.  What 
connection  there  can  be  between  the  Aida.  and  the  Vaira^a-pr/sh/^a 
(Sama-v.,  vol.  v,  p.  391  ;  cf  vol.  i,  pp.  814-5)  it  is  not  easy  to  see. 
In  6at.  Br.  V,  4,  i,  6  the  North  is  connected  with  the  Anush/ubh, 
the  Vaira^a-saman,  the  Ekaviwj-a  and  the  auiumn. 


VIII    KANDA,    I    ADHYAYA,    2    BRAIIMAA^A,    8.  I  I 


— therewith  he  introduced  the  ear  from  the  left  (or 
upper)  side.  Separately  he  lays  down  (these  bricks) : 
what  separate  desires  there  are  in  the  ear,  those  he 
thereby  lays  into  it.  Only  once  he  settles  them  : 
he  thereby  makes  the  ear  one ;  but  were  he  to 
settle  them  each  separately,  he  assuredly  would  cut 
the  ear  asunder.  This  is  a  threefold  brick  :  the 
meaning  of  this  has  been  explained. 

7.  Then  in  the  centre,  with  (Va^.  S.  XIII,  58), 
'This  one,  above,  the  mind,' — above,  doubtless, 
is  the  moon  ;  and  as  to  why  he  speaks  of  him  as 
(being)  '  above,'  the  moon  is  indeed  above  ;  and  as 
to  why  he  says,  '  the  mind,'  the  mind  (mati),  doubt- 
less, is  speech,  for  by  means  of  speech  everything 
thinks  (man)  here  ^  The  moon,  having  become 
speech,  remained  above :  it  is  that  form  he  now 
bestows  (on  Agni\ 

8.  'Its,  the  mind's,  daughter,  Speech,' — from 
out  of  that  form,  the  moon,  he  fashioned  speech  ; — 
'Winter,  the  son  of  Speech,'  —  from  out  of 
speech  he  fashioned  the  winter  season; — 'Pahkti, 
the  daucrhter  of  Winter,' — from  out  of  the  winter 

o 

season  he  fashioned  the  Pahkti  metre; — 'from  the 
Pahkti  the  Nidhanavat,' — from  out  of  the  Pahkti 
metre  he  fashioned  the  Nidhanavat-saman  - ; — 
'from  the  Nidhanavat  the  Agraya;^a,' — from 
out    of    the    Nidhanavat-saman    he    fashioned    the 

A 

Agraya;/a  cup; — 'from  the  Agrayawa  the 
Tri^ava  and  Trayastri;;^5a,' — from  out  of  the 
Agrayawa-graha  he  fashioned  the  thrice-nine-versed 
and    the    three-and-thirty-versed    hymn-forms ;  — 


'  Or,  perhaps,  one  thinks  everything  here. 

-  That  is  a  saman  wliich  has  a  special  nidhana,  or  chorus,  added 
at  tlie  end  (or  inserted  in  the  middle)  of  it. 


12  i'ATAPATMA-BRAHMAA^X. 

'from  the  Tri?^ava  and  Trayastri;^/^a  the  Ss-k- 
vara  and  Raivata,' — from  out  of  the  Tri/^ava  and 
Trayastri;7^5"a-stomas  he  fashioned  the  ^'akvara  and 
Raivata-pr/sh///as  \ 

9.  'The  Rish'i  Vi^vakarman,' — the  i?/shi  Vi^-- 
vakarman  ('the  all-worker'),  doubtless,  is  Speech, 
for  by  speech  everything  here  is  done :  hence  the 
/?/shi  Vi^vakarman  is  speech: — 'By  thee,  taken 
by  Pra^apati,' — that  is,  '  by  thee,  created  by 
Pra^apati ; ' — 'I  take  speech  for  my  descen- 
dants,'—  therewith  he  introduced  speech  from 
above.  Separately  he  lays  down  (these  bricks)  : 
what  separate  desires  there  are  in  speech,  those  he 
now  lays  into  it.  Only  once  he  settles  them  :  he 
thereby  makes  speech  one  ;  but  were  he  to  settle 
them  each  separately,  he  assuredly  would  cut  speech 
asunder.  This  is  a  threefold  brick  :  the  meaning  of 
this  has  been  explained. 

10.  This,  then,  is  that  same  food  which  both  the 
vital  airs  and  Pra^apati  created:  just  so  great  indeed 
is  the  whole  sacrifice,  and  the  sacrifice  is  the  food  of 
the  gods. 

11.  He  lays  them  down  by  ten  and  ten, — of  ten 
syllables  consists  the  Vira^  (metre),  and  the  Viraf 
is  all  food :  he  thus  bestows  on  him  (Agni)  the 
whole  food.  He  puts  them  down  on  every  side  : 
on  every  side  he  thus  bestows  the  whole  food  on 
him.  And  verily  these  same  Yira^  (verses)  sustain 
those  vital  airs,  and  inasmuch  as  they  sustain  (bhr/) 
the  vital  airs  (pra;^a)  they  are  called  Pra//abh;Vta//. 

'  For  these  Pr/sh//za-samans  see  part  iii,  introd.  pp.  xx-xxi.  In 
V,  4,  I,  7  the  upper  region  is  symbolically  connected  with  the 
Pahkti  metre,  the  -.Sakvara  and  Raivata-samans,  the  Tri«ava  and 
Trayastriwja-stomas,  and  the  winter  and  dewy  seasons. 


Vni    KA.VZJA,    I    ADHYAVA,    3    BRAHMAiVA,    3.  I  3 

Third  Brahmaa^a. 

1.  As  to  this  they  say,  'What  are  the  vital  airs 
(pra/^a),  and  what  the  Pra;/abhrz'ta//  ? ' — The  vital 
airs  are  just  the  vital  airs,  and  the  Pra;^abh;7'ta/^ 
(holders  of  the  vital  airs)  are  the  limbs,  for  the  limbs 
do  hold  the  vital  airs.  But,  indeed,  the  vital  airs 
are  the  vital  airs,  and  the  Pra;^abh;Vt  is  food,  for 
food  does  uphold  the  vital  airs. 

2.  As  to  this  they  say,  '  How  do  all  these  (Pra;^a- 
bhm-bricks)  of  him  ( Agni  and  the  Sacrificer)  come 
to  be  of  Prac'apati's  nature?' — Doubtless  in  that 
with  all  of  them  he  says,  '  By  thee,  taken  by  Pra^^a- 
pati : '  it  is  in  this  way,  indeed,  that  they  all  come 
to  be  for  him  of  Pra^c^apati's  nature  \ 

3.  As  to  this  they  say,  'As  they  chant  and  recite 
for  the  cup  when  drawn,  wherefore,  then,  does  he 
put  in  verses  and  h)  mn-tunes  ^  before  (the  drawing 
of)  the  cups  ? ' — Doubtless,  the  completion  of  the 
sacrificial  work  has  to  be  kept  in  view ; — now  with 
the  opening-  hymn-verse  the  cup  is  drawn ;  and  on 
the  verse  {rile)  the  tune  (saman)  is  sung  :  this  means 
that  he  thereby  puts  in  for  him  (Agni)  both  the 
verses  and  hymn-tunes  before  (the  drawing  of)  the 
cups.  And  when  after  (the  drawing  of)  the  cups 
there  are  the  chanting  (of  the  Stotra)  and  the  recita- 
tion (of  the  ^astra)  :  this  means  that  thereby  he  puts 
in  for  him  both  the  stomas  (hymn-forms)  and  the 
p?7shMa  (samans)  after  (the  drawing  of)  the  cups  ^. 

*  Or,  come  to  be  (Agni-)  Pra^'^apati's  (pr%apatya  bhavanti). 

^  In  laying  down  the  different  sets  of  Prawabhr/t-bricks  the 
priest  is  said  (in  VIII,  1,1,5;  ^  ;  2,  2  ;  5 ;  8)  symbolically  to  put 
into  the  sacrificial  work  (or  into  the  altar,  Agni)  both  verses  or 
metres  (as  Gayatri,  Tribh/ut:)h,  &c.)  and  hymn-tunes  (as  Gayatra, 
Svara,  &c.). 

^  It  is  not  quite  clear  whether  this  is  the  correct  construction  of 


14  S-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAA^A. 

4.  As  to  this  they  say,  '  If  these  three  are  done 
together — the  soma-cup,  the  chant,  and  the  recita- 
tion,— and  he  puts  in  only  the  soma-cup  and  the 
chant,  how  comes  the  recitation  also  in  this  case  to 
be  put  (into  the  sacrificial  work)  for  him  ^  ?  '  But, 
surely,  what  the  chant  is  that  is  the  recitation  ^  ; 
for  on  whatsoever  (verses)  they  chant  a  tune,  those 
same  (verses)  he  (the  Hotr?)  recites  thereafter^; 
and  in  this  way,  indeed,  the  ^'astra  also  comes  in 
this  case  to  be  put  in  for  him. 

5.  As  to  this  they  say,  'When  he  speaks  first 
of  three  in  the  same  way  as  of  a  father's  son  *,  how, 
then,  does  this  correspond  as  regards  the  rik  and 
saman?'   The  saman,  doubtless,  is  the  husband  of  the 

the  text,  especially  as,  in  the  paragraph  referred  to  in  the  last  note, 
it  is  not  only  the  metres  and  tunes  that  are  supposed  to  be  put  in 
along  with  the  Prawabhr/ta//,  but  also  the  stomas  and  przsh///a- 
samans. 

^  Only  soma-cups  (graha)  and  hymn-tunes  (saman)  and  hymn- 
forms  (stoma)  are  specially  named  in  connection  with  these  bricks, 
but  no  jastras. 

"^  Every  stotra,  chanted  by  the  Udgatr/s,  is  followed  by  a  jastra 
recited  by  the  Hot;-;'  or  one  of  his  assistants. 

^  Most  chants  (stotra)  consisting  of  a  single  triplet  (e.g.  the 
Pr/shMa-stotras  at  the  midday  service)  have  their  text  (stotriya- 
\.rik\)  included  in  the  corresponding  jastra  recited  by  the  Hot;-/,  or 
one  of  the  Hotrakas ;  it  being  followed,  on  its  part,  by  the  recita- 
tion of  an  analogous  triplet  (anurupa,  '  similar  or  corresponding,' 
i.e.  antistrophe)  usually  commencing  with  the  very  same  word,  or 
words,  as  the  stotriya. 

*  As  in  the  case  of  the  first  (south-west)  set  of  bricks,  VIII,  1,1, 
4-6,  he  puts  down  the  first  four  with  '  This  one,  in  front,  the 
existent,'  '  His,  the  existent's  son,  the  breath,'  '  Spring,  the  son  of 
the  breath,'  and  '  The  Gayatri,  the  daughter  of  spring,'— implying 
three  generations  from  father  to  son  (or  daughter).  In  the  formulas 
of  the  remaining  bricks  of  each  set  referring  to  the  metres  (or  verses, 
rik)  and  hymn-tunes  (saman)  the  statement  of  descent  is  expressed 
more  vaguely  by,  '  From  the  Gayatri  (is  derived)  the  Gayatra,'  &c. 


VIII    KANDA,    I    ADHYAYA,    3    BRAHMAiVA,    8.  1 5 


J^i/c  ;  and  hence  were  he  also  in  their  case  to  speak 
as  of  a  father's  son,  it  would  be  as  if  he  spoke  of 
him  who  is  the  husband,  as  of  the  son  :  therefore 
it  corresponds  as  regards  the  n'/c  and  saman.  'And 
why  does  he  thrice  carry  on  (the  generation  from 
father  to  son)?' — father,  son,  and  grandson:  it  is 
these  he  thereby  carries  on  ;  and  therefore  one  and 
the  same  (man)  offers  (food)  to  them  \ 

6.  Those  (bricks)  which  he  lays  down  in  front  are 
the  holders  of  the  upward  air  (the  breath,  pra;-;a)  ; 
those  behind  are  the  eye-holders,  the  holders  of  the 
downward  air  (apana)-;  those  on  the  right  side  are 
the  mind-holders,  the  holders  of  the  circulating  air 
(vyana) ;  those  on  the  left  side  are  the  ear-holders, 
the  holders  of  the  outward  air  (udana)  ;  and 
those  in  the  middle  are  the  speech-holders,  the 
holders  of  the  pervading  air  (samana). 

7.  Now  the  A'arakadhvaryus,  indeed,  lay  down 
different  (bricks)  as  holders  of  the  downward  air, 
of  the  circulating  air,  of  the  outward  air,  of  the 
pervading  air,  as  eye-holders,  mind-holders,  ear- 
holders,  and  speech-holders  ;  but  let  him  not  do  this, 
for  they  do  what  is  excessive,  and  in  this  (our)  way, 
indeed,  all  those  forms  are  laid  (into  Agni). 

8.  Now,  when  he  has  laid  down  (the  bricks)  in 


1  At  the  offerings  to  the  Fathers,  or  deceased  ancestors,  oblations 
are  made  to  the  father,  grandfather,  and  great-grandfather;  see  II, 

4,  2,  23. 

■-'  Sayawa.  on  Taitt.  S.  IV,  3,  3,  explains  '  pra«a'  by  '  bahi/^saw- 
X-ararupa,'  and  '  apana  '  by  '  punaranta/^sawMrarupa  ; '  sec  also  part  i, 
p.  120,  note  2;  but  cp.  Maitry-up.  II,  6  ;  H.Walter,  HaZ/moga- 
pradipika,  p.  xviii.  Beside  the  fifty  bricks  called  '  Pra«abhr/ta//,' 
the  Taittiriyas  also  place  fifty  Apanabh/7la//  in  the  first  layer  of 
the  altar. 


I  6  DATAPATH  A  BRAHMAA^A. 

front,  he  lays  down  those  at  the  back  (of  the  altar)  ; 
for  the  upward  air,  becoming  the  downward  air, 
passes  along-  thus  from  the  tips  of  the  fingers; 
and  the  downward  air,  becoming  the  upward  air, 
passes  along  thus  from  the  tips  of  the  toes  : 
hence  when,  after  laying  down  (the  bricks)  in  front, 
he  lays  down  those  at  the  back,  he  thereby  makes 
these  two  breathings  continuous  and  connects  them  ; 
whence  these  two  breathings  are  continuous  and 
connected. 

9.  And  when  he  has  laid  down  those  on  the  right 
side,  he  lays  down  those  on  the  left  side  ;  for  the 
outward  air,  becoming  the  circulating  air,  passes 
along  thus  from  the  tips  of  the  fingers';  and 
the  circulating  air,  becoming  the  outward  air, 
passes  along  thus  from  the  tips  of  the  fingers': 
hence  when,  after  laying  down  (the  bricks)  on 
the  right  side,  he  lays  down  those  on  the  left 
side,  he  thereby  makes  these  two  breathings  con- 
tinuous and  connects  them;  whence  these  two  breath- 
ings are  continuous  and  connected. 

10.  And  those  (bricks)  which  he  lays  down  in  the 
centre  are  the  vital  air;  he  lays  them  down  on  the 
range  of  the  two  Reta//si/C'  (bricks),  for  the  reta//si/C' 
are  the  ribs,  and  the  ribs  are  the  middle  :  he  thus 
lays  the  vital  air  into  him  (Agni  and  the  Sacrificer)  in 
the  very  middle  (of  the  body).  On  every  side  he  lays 
down  (the  central  bricks)  ^ :    in  every  part  he  thus 

^  ?  Or,  perhaps,  the  fingers  and  toes.  The  same  word  (anguh), 
having  both  meanings,  makes  it  difficult  exactly  to  understand  these 
processes.  The  available  IMSS.  of  Harisvamin's  commentary  un- 
fortunately afford  no  help. 

*  That  is  to  say,  he  lays  down  the  fifth  set  round  the  (central) 
Svayamair/w/m,  on  the   range  of  the  two  Reta/isi-('  bricks.     It  is, 


VIII    KANDA,    I    ADIIYAYA,    3    BRAIIMAA^A,     TO.         I  7 

lays  vital  air  into  him  ;  and  in  the  same  way  indeed 
that  intestinal  breath  (channel)  is  turned  all  round 

however,  not  quite  clear  in  what  particular  manner  this  fifth  set  of 
ten  bricks  is  to  be  arranged  round  the  centre  so  as  to  touch  one 
another.  The  two  Reta,^si/^  bricks,  occupying  each  a  space  of 
a  square  foot  north  and  south  of  the  spine,  are  separated  from  the 
central  (Svayamatr/««a)  brick  by  th2  Dviya^us  brick  a  foot  square. 
The  inner  side  of  the  reta//si^'-space  would  thus  be  a  foot  and 
a  half,  and  their  outer  side  two  feet  and  a  half,  distant  from  the 
central  point  of  the  altar.  The  reta//si/C'  range,  properly  speaking, 
would  thus  consist  of  a  circular  rim,  obtained  by  drawing  two 

THE  CENTRAL   PART   OF   THE   FIRST    LAYER. 


N 


VJ 


^ 

/ 

A 

\ 

/. 

r 

A 

/ 

--^  i  ^\ 

\ 

/. 

/ 

/ 

\ 

„ 

ff/T 

— 

--S-- 

\ 

-DV--J 

V 

A 

\^ 

V 

/?;t. 

1 

/ 

\ 

\^ 

\^     !     ^^ 

// 

/ 

/> 

/> 

\ 

1 

/ 

^ 

y 

concentric  circles  round  the  centre,  with  diameters  of  one  and  a  half 
and  two  and  a  half  feet  respectively.  On  this  rim  (allowing  for  the 
corners  of  the  bricks  jutting  out)  room  would  have  to  be  found  for 
twelve  bricks  of  a  foot  square,  viz.  the  two  reta/fsi-^,  already  lying 
on  the  eastern  side,  south  and  north  of  the  spine,  and  ten  prawa- 
bh/-/ls.  The  way  in  which  these  latter  were  arranged  would 
probably  be  this :  on  each  of  the  three  other  sides  two  bricks  were 
laid  down  so  as  to  join  each  other  in  a  line  with  the  respective 
'  spine,'  similarly  to  the  two  reta,^si^'  bricks  on  the  east  side ;  and 
the  four  remaining  bricks  would  then  be  placed  in  the  four 
corners— the  twelve  bricks  thus  forming,  as  nearly  as  could  be, 
a  circular  rim.  In  the  construction  of  the  altar,  this  xt\zh€\k  range 
is  determined  by  a  cord  being  stretched  from  the  centre  to  the 
east  end  of  the  altar,  after  the  special  bricks  of  the  first  layer  have 

[43]  C 


1 8  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

the  navel.  He  lays  them  down  both  lengthwise 
and  crosswise  \  whence  there  are  here  in  the  body 
(channels  of)  the  vital  airs  both  lengthwise  and  cross- 
wise. He  lays  them  down  touching  each  other  :  he 
thereby  makes  these  vital  airs  continuous  and  con- 
nects them ;  whence  these  (channels  of  the)  vital 
airs  are  continuous  and  connected. 

Fourth  BRAHMAiVA. 

I.  Now  some  lay  down  (these  bricks)  so  as  to  be 
in  contact  with  the  (gold)  man,  for  he  is  the  vital 
air,  and  him  these  (bricks)  sustain ;  and  because 
they  sustain  (bhr/)  the  vital  air  (pra/^a),  therefore 
they  are  called  '  Pra;^abhr/ta//.'  Let  him  not  do  so  : 
the  vital  air  is  indeed  the  same  as  that  gold  man, 
but  this  body  of  his  extends  to  as  far  here  as  this 
fire  (altar)  has  been  marked  out.      Hence  to  what- 

been  laid  down,  knots  being  then  made  in  the  cord  over  the  middle 
of  each  of  the  special  bricks.  The  reta/zsiX'  range  is  consequently 
ascertained,  in  subsequent  layers,  by  a  circle  drawn  round  the 
centre,  with  that  part  of  the  cord  marked  by  the  central  and  the 
reta/isik  knot  for  the  diameter.  The  foregoing  diagram  shows  that 
portion  of  the  first  layer  which  contains  the  continuous  row  of 
special  bricks  laid  down  first,  viz.  Svayamatrw/m,  Dviya_o-us,  tw^o 
Reta/isi/(',  Vi^va^yotis,  two  7?/tavya,  and  Ashafl^a ;  and  further  the 
central  (or  fifth)  set  of  ten  pra;;abhr/ta/;,  placed  round  the  central 
brick  on  the  range  of  the  reta/isik. 

^  Each  special  brick  is  marked  on  its  upper  surface  with  (usually 
three)  parallel  lines.  Now  the  bricks  are  always  laid  down  in  such 
a  way  that  their  lines  run  parallel  to  the  adjoining  spine,  whence 
those  on  the  east  and  west  sides  have  their  lines  running  lengthwise 
(west  to  east),  and  those  on  the  north  and  south  sides  crosswise 
(north  to  south).  As  to  the  four  corner  bricks  there  is  some 
uncertainty  on  this  point,  but  if  we  may  judge  from  the  analogy 
of  the  second  layer  in  this  respect,  the  bricks  of  the  south-east  and 
north-west  corners  would  be  eastward-lined,  and  those  of  the  north- 
east and  south-west  corners  northward-lined. 


VIII    KAiVDA,    I    ADHVAVA,    4    T^RAHMA.VA,    3.  1 9 


ever  limb  of  his  these  (breath-holders)  were  not  to 
reach,  that  limb  of  his  the  vital  air  would  not  reach  ; 
and,  to  be  sure,  to  whatever  limb  the  vital  air  does 
not  reach,  that  either  dries  up  or  withers  away  :  let 
him  therefore  lay  down  these  (bricks)  so  as  to  be  in 
contact  with  the  enclosing  stones ;  and  by  those 
which  he  lays  down  in  the  middle  this  body  of  his 
is  filled  up,  and  they  at  least  are  not  separated 
from  him. 

2.  Here  now  they  say,  'Whereas  in  (the  formulas) 
"  This  one,  in  front,  the  existent — this  one,  on  the 
right,  the  all-worker — this  one,  behind,  the  all-em- 
bracer — this,  on  the  left,  heaven — this  one,  above, 
the  mind" — they  (these  bricks)  are  defined  as  exactly 
opposite  the  quarters,  why,  then,  does  he  lay  down 
these  (bricks)  in  sidelong  places  ^  ? '  Well,  the 
Pra;/abhr/ta//  are  the  vital  airs  ;  and  if  he  were  to 
place  them  exactly  opposite  the  quarters,  then  this 
breath  would  only  pass  forward  and  backward ;  but 
inasmuch  as  he  now  lays  down  these  (bricks)  thus 
defined  in  sidelong  places,  therefore  this  breath, 
whilst  being  a  backward  and  forward  one,  passes 
sideways  along  all  the  limbs  and  the  whole  body. 

3.  Now  that  Agni  (the  altar)  is  an  animal,  and  (as 
such)  he  is  even  now  made  up  whole  and  entire, — 
those  (bricks)  which  he  lays  down  in  front  are  his 
fore-feet,  and  those  behind  are  his  thiohs;  and  those 


^  That  is  to  say,  why  does  he  not  place  them  at  the  ends  of  the 
spines,  but  at  the  corners  of  the  (square)  body,  i.e.  in  places  inter- 
mediate between  the  lines  running  in  the  direction  of  the  points  of 
the  compass  ?  When  speaking  of  the  regions,  or  quarters,  it  should 
be  borne  in  mind  that  they  also  include  a  fifth  direction,  viz.  the 
perpendicular  or  vertical  line  (both  upward  and  downward)  at  any 
given  point  of  the  plane. 

C   2 


20  5ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

which  he  places  in  the  middle  are  that  body  of  his. 
He  places  these  in  the  region  of  the  two  reta//si/C' 
(bricks),  for  the  reta/^si/^  are  the  ribs,  and  the  ribs 
are  the  middle,  and  that  body  is  in  the  middle  (of 
the  limbs).  He  places  them  all  round,  for  that 
body  extends  all  round. 

4.  Here  now  they  say, '  Whereas  in  the  first  (four) 
sets  he  lays  down  a  single  stoma  and  a  single 
p;'/shMa  each  time,  why,  then,  does  he  lay  down 
here  (in  the  centre)  two  stomas  and  two  pr/sh//^as  ?' 
Well,  this  (central  set)  is  his  (Agni's)  body  :  he  thus 
makes  the  body  (trunk)  the  best,  the  largest,  the 
most  vigorous  of  limbs '  ;  whence  that  body  is  the 
best,  the  largest,  and  most  vigorous  of  limbs. 

5.  Here  now  they  say,  '  How  does  that  Agni  of 
his  become  made  up  whole  and  entire  in  brick  after 
brick  ? ' — Well,  the  formula  is  the  marrow,  the  brick 
the  bone,  the  settling  the  flesh,  the  sudadohas  the 
skins,  the  formula  of  the  purisha  (fillings  of  earth) 
the  hair,  and  the  purisha  the  food  :  and  thus  indeed 
that  Agni  of  his  becomes  made  up  whole  and  entire 
in  brick  after  brick. 

6.  That  Agni  is  possessed  of  all  vital  power : 
verily,  whosoever  knows  that  Agni  to  be  possessed 
of  all  vital  power  (ayus),  attains  his  full  measure  of 
life  (ayus). 

7.  Now,  then,  as  to  the  contraction  and  expansion 
(of  the  body).  Now  some  cause  the  built  (altar)  in 
this  way-  to  be  possessed  of  (the  power  of)  contrac- 
tion and  expansion  :  that  Agni  indeed  is  an  animal ; 


^  Or, — better,  larger,  and  more  vigorous  ihan  the  limbs. 
2  Viz.  by  touching,  or  stroking  along,  the  layer  of  the  altar,  and 
muttering  the  subsequent  formulas. 


VIII    KAA'DA,     I     ADHYAYA,  4   DRAHMAiVA,    I O.  2  1 

and  when  an  animal  contracts  and  expands  its  limbs, 
it  develops  strength  by  them. 

8.  [Va^.  S.  XXVII,  45]  'Thou  art  Sawvat- 
sara, — thou  art  Parivatsara, — thou  art  Idavat- 
sara, — thou  art  Idvatsara, — thou  art  Vatsara. 
— May  thy  dawns  prosper^  ! — may  thy  days  and 
nights  prosper! — may  thy  half-months  pros- 
per!—  may  thy  months  prosper!  —  may  thy 
seasons  prosper! — may  thy  year  prosper! — 
For  going  and  coming  contract  and  expand 
thyself!  —  Of  Eagle-build  thou  art:  by  that 
deity,  Angiras-like,  lie  thou  steady-'!' 

9.  ^a/yayani  also  once  said,  'Some  one  heard 
(the  sound)  ^  of  the  cracking  wings  of  the  (altar) 
when  touched  with  this  (formula) :  let  him  therefore 
by  all  means  touch  it  therewith ! ' 

10.  And  Svar^it  Nagna^ita  or  Nagna^it,  the 
Gandhara,  once  said,  'Contraction  and  expansion 
surely  are  the  breath,  for  in  whatever  part  of  the 
body  there  is  breath  that  it  both  contracts  and  ex- 
pands ;  let  him  breathe  upon  it  from  outside  when 
completely  built :  he  thereby  lays  breath,  the  (power 
of)  contraction  and  expansion,  into  it,  and  so  it  con- 
tracts and  expands.'  But  indeed  what  he  there  said 
as  to  that  contraction  and  expansion,  it  was  only 
one  of  the  princely  order  who  said  it ;  and  assuredly 
were  they  to  breathe  u|jon  it  from  outside  a  hundred 


'   Or,  perhaps,  '  may  the  daw  ns  chime  in  (fit  in)  with  thee  ! ' 
"^  For  this  last  part  of  the  formula  ('  by  that  deity,'  &c.),  the  so- 
called  settling-formula,  see  part  iii,  p.  307,  note  i. 

*  Harisvamin  (Ind.  Off.  MS.  657)  seems  to  supply  'jabdam;' 
the  sound  of  the  cracking  being  taken  as  a  sign  of  the  powerful 
effect  of  the  formula.  Unfortunately,  however,  the  IMS.  of  the 
commentary  is  hopelessly  incorrect. 


2  2  5ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 


times,  or  a  thousand  times,  they  could  not  lay  breath 
into  it.  Whatever  breath  there  is  in  the  (main)  body 
that  alone  is  the  breath  :  hence  when  he  lays  down 
the  Pra;/abhr/ta/2  (breath-holders),  he  thereby  lays 
breath,  the  (power  of)  contraction  and  expansion, 
into  it;  and  so  it  contracts  and  expands.  He  then 
lays  down  two  Lokampr/V^a  (bricks)  in  that  corner': 
the  meaning-  of  them  (will  be  explained)  further  on  '\ 
He  throws  loose  earth  (on  the  layer)  :  the  meaning 
of  this  (will  be  explained)  further  on  '\ 

THE   SECOND   LAYER. 
Second  Adhyaya.     First  BRAHMAiVA. 

I.   He  lays  down  the  second  layer.      For  now  the 
gods,  having  laid  down  the  first  layer,  mounted  it. 

^  Viz.  in  the  south-east  corner,  or  on  the  right  shoulder,  of  the 
altar.  From  these  two  lokarnpr/«as  (or  space-fillers)  he  starts 
filling  up,  in  two  turns,  the  still  available  spaces  of  the  '  body '  of 
the  altar,  as  also  the  whole  of  the  two  wings  and  the  tail.  For 
other  particulars  as  to  the  way  in  which  these  are  laid  down,  see 
VIII,  7,  2,  I  seqq.  The  '  body '  of  an  ordinary  altar  requires  in  this 
layer  1028  lokampnVzas  of  three  different  kinds,  viz.  afoot  (Ind.),  half 
a  foot,  and  a  quarter  of  a  foot  square,  occupying  together  a  space 
of  321  square  feet,  whilst  the  98  special  (ya^ushmati)  bricks  fill  up 
a  space  of  79  square  feet.  Each  wing  requires  309  lokamp/7>/as 
of  together  120  square  feet;  whilst  the  tail  takes  283  such  bricks, 
of  together  110  square  feet.  The  total  number  of  lokamprMs  in 
the  layer  thus  amounts  to  1929  of  all  sizes,  equal  to  671  square 
feet.  If  (as  is  done  in  Katy.  ^Srautas.  XVII,  7,  21)  the  21  bricks 
of  the  Garhapatya  (part  iii,  p.  304)  are  added  to  this  number,  the 
total  number  of  lokampr/;;as  is  1,950.  Similarly,  in  the  second, 
third,  and  fourth  layers;  whilst  the  last  layer  requires  about  a 
thousand  lokampr///as  more  than  any  of  the  others,  viz.  2,922,  or, 
including  the  special  hearths,  3,000.  The  total  number  of  such 
bricks  required — including  the  2 1  of  the  Garhapatya — amounts  to 
10,800.     Cp.  Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  XIII,  p.  255. 

2  See  VIII,  7,  2,  I  seq.  '  See  VIII,  7,  3,  i  seq. 


VIII    KANDA,    2    ADHYAYA,    I   BRAHMAiVA,    4.  23 


But,  indeed,  the  first  layer  is  this  (terrestrial)  world  : 
it  is  this  same  world  which,  when  completed,  they 
mounted. 

2.  They  spake,  '  Meditate  ye  ! ' — whereby,  doubt- 
less, they  meant  to  say,  '  Seek  ye  a  layer !  Seek 
ye  (to  build)  from  hence  upwards ! '  Whilst  medi- 
tating-, they  saw  this  second  layer :  what  there  is 
above  the  earth,  and  on  this  side  of  the  atmosphere, 
that  world  was  to  their  mind,  as  it  were,  unfirm 
and  unsettled. 

3.  They  said  to  the  A^vins, '  Ye  two  are  Brahmans 
and  physicians :  lay  ye  down  for  us  this  second 
layer  ! ' — '  What  will  therefrom  accrue  unto  us  ?  ' — 
*  Ye  two  shall  be  the  Adhvaryus  at  this  our  Agni- 
/^itya.' — '  So  be  it ! ' — The  A-?vins  laid  down  for  them 
that  second  layer  :  whence  they  say,  '  The  A5vins 
are  the  Adhvaryus  of  the  gods.' 

4.  He   lays  down  (the  first  A^vini'  brick,  with 


^  The  main  portion  of  the  special  bricks  of  the  second  layer 
consists  of  five,  or  (if,  for  the  nonce,  we  take  the  two  southern  sets 
of  half-bricks  as  one)  of  four  sets  of  four  bricks  each,  or  of  together 
sixteen  bricks,  each  measuring  a  foot  square,  placed  on  the  range 
of  the  rela//si/^  bricks  so  as  to  form  the  outer  rim  of  a  square 
measuring  five  feet  on  each  side,  and  having  in  the  middle  a  blank 
square  of  nine  square  feet.  Each  of  the  four  sides  of  the  reta/^si-C- 
rim  contains  a  complete  set  of  four  bricks  ;  but  as  there  are  five 
bricks  on  each  side,  the  one  in  the  left-hand  corner  (looking  at 
them  from  the  centre  of  the  square)  is  counted  along  with  the 
adjoining  set.  Each  set,  jiroceeding  from  left  to  right  (that  is,  in 
sunwise  fashion),  consists  of  the  following  bricks,— ajvini,  vai^va- 
devi,  pra«abhr/t,  and  apasya,  the  last  of  these  occupying  the 
corner  spaces.  The  southern  bricks  consist,  however,  of  two  sets 
of  half-bricks  (running  with  their  long  sides  from  west  to  east), 
counted  as  the  second  and  fifth  set  respectively.  The  eastern  and 
western  bricks  are  laid  down  so  that  their  line-marks  (which,  in  the 
case  of  the  bricks  of  the  second  and  fourth  layers,  are  of  an  in- 
definite number)  run  from  west  to  east ;  whilst  those  of  the  southern 


24 


S-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 


Va^.  S.  XIV,  i),  'Thou  art  firmly-founded, 
firmly-seated,  firm  !'  for  what  is  steady  and  set- 
tled, that  is  firm.  Now  that  world  was  to  their 
minds,  as  it  were,  unfirm  and  unsettled :  having 
thereby  made  it  firm,  steady,  they  (the  A-S"vins)  went 
on  laying  down  (bricks). — 'Seat  thee  fitly  in  thy 
firm  seat!'- — that  is,  'Seat  thee  fitly  in  thy  steady 
seat;' — 'enjoying  the  first  appearance  of  the 
Ukhya,' — the  Ukhya,  doubtless,  is  this  Agni  ;  and 
that  first  layer  is  indeed  his  first  appearance  :  thus, 
'enjoying  that.' — 'May  the  A^-vins,  the  Adh- 
varyus,  settle  you  here!'  for  the  A^vins,  as 
Adhvaryus,  did  lay  down  (this  brick). 


and  northern  ones  run  from  south  to  north.  All  the  five  bricks  of 
each  class,  beginning  with  the  ajvinis,  are  laid  down  at  the  same 
time,  proceeding  again  in  sunwise  fashion  (east,  south,  &c.) ;  the 

THE   CENTRAL   PART    OF   THE   SECOND   LAYER. 


N 


w 


"/ 

^ 

k' 

^- 

v* 

1- 

f" 

r-  — -'-  —  - 

\ 

■   \ 

1 

/?/T. 

.._^.3._ 

V 

.__-|_-_ 

ff/T. 

\a"' 

V 

K 

p' 

(1^ 

/.' 

a~ 

\,n? 

-l~ 

^^0'~ 

order  of  the  procedure  being  only  interrupted  by  the  two  i?/tavya 
bricks  being  laid  down,  immediately  after  the  placing  of  the  five 
ajvini,  exactly  over  the  two  r/tavyas  of  the  first  layer,  that  is  to  say 
in  the  fifth  (easterly)  space  from  the  centre,  north  and  south  of  the 
spine.  The  only  other  special  bricks  of  the  second  layer  are 
nineteen  vayasyas  placed  at  the  four  ends  of  the  two  spines,  viz. 
four  in  the  east,  and  five  in  each  of  the  other  quarters. 


VIII    KANDA,    2    ADHYAVA,    I    BRAHMAA'A,    6.  25 


A 

5.  [The  second  Ai-vini  he  lays  down,  with  Vaf.  S. 
XIV,  2],  '  Nest-like,  fat,  wise,' — a  nest,  as  it  were, 
is  indeed  the  second  layer ^- — '  seat  thee  in  the  soft 
seat  of  the  earth!' — the  second  layer,  no  doubt, 
is  the  earth :  thus,  '  Sit  on  her  pleasant  seat ! ' — '  May 
the  Rudras,  the  Vasus  sing  thy  praises  ! ' — that 
is,  'May  those  deities  sing  thy  praises!' — 'Re- 
plenish them,  O  Brahman,  for  happiness  ! ' — 
that  is,  '  Favour  them,  O  Brahman,  with  a  view  to 
happiness.' — 'May  the  Ai"vins,  the  Adhvaryus, 
settle  thee  here!'  for  the  A-s-vins,  as  Adhvaryus, 
did  lay  down  (this  brick). 

6.  [The  third  Ai-vini  brick  he  lays  down,  with 
Va^-.  S.  XIV,  3], '  By  thine  own  powers  seat  thee 
here,  a  holder  of  powers,' — that  is,  '  By  thy  own 
energy  seat  thee  here;' — 'in  the  gods'  favour  for 
high  joy  !'  that  is,  'for  the  favour  of  the  gods,  for 
great  joy-;' — 'be  thou  kind,  as  a  father  to  his 
son!' — that  is,  'As  a  father  is  gentle,  kind,  to  his 
son,  so  be  thou  kind!' — 'rest  thou  readily  acces- 
sible with  thy  form!' — the  form,  doubtless,  is  the 
body  :  thus, '  rest  thou  with  readily  accessible  body!' 
— '  May  the  Ai-vins,  the  Adhvaryus,  settle  thee 
here!  '  for  the  Ai-vins,  as  Adhvaryus,  did  lay  down 
(this  brick). 


^  This  comparison  doubiless  refers  to  the  way  in  which  the 
central  portion  of  the  special  bricks  of  this  layer  are  arranged  so  as 
completely  to  enclose  an  empty  space  in  the  middle.  In  the  first 
layer  there  was,  no  doubt,  a  similar  enclosure  of  bricks  as  the 
reta//siX'  range,  but  the  central  space  was  not  left  quite  empty.  In 
the  end,  however,  the  empty  spaces  are  in  both  cases  filled  up  by 
'  space-fillers.' 

^  The  author  seems  to  take  '  ra«a'  as  an  adjective  (  =  rama«iya), 
as  does  Mahidhara,  who  interprets  the  formula  as  meaning  '  for 
the  gods'  great,  cheerful  happiness.' 


26  i'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

7.  [The  fourth^  A^vini  he  lays  down,  with  Va^.  S, 
XIV,  4],  'Thou  art  the  earth's  soil-cover,'— 
the  first  layer,  doubtless,  is  the  earth,  and  this,  the 
second  (layer)  is,  as  it  were,  its  soil-cover  (purisha) — 
'her  sap\  in  truth,' — that  is,  'her  essence,  in  truth,' 
— '  May  the  All-gods  sing  thy  praises  ! ' — that  is, 
'  May  all  the  gods  sing  thy  praises  ! ' — 'Seat  thee 
here,  laden  with  stomas,  and  rich  in  fat ! ' — what- 
ever hymn-forms  he  will  be  spreading  (constructing) 
thereon  by  them  this  (brick)  is  laden  with  stomas  " ; 
— 'Gain  for  us  by  sacrifice  wealth  (dravi;/a,  pi.) 
with  offspring  (adj.  sing.) !' — that  is,  '  Gain  for  us, 
by  sacrifice,  wealth  (dravi//am,  sing.)  with  offspring ! ' 
— '  May  the  A^vins,  the  Adhvaryus,  settle  thee 
here!  '  for  the  A-?vins,  as  Adhvaryus,  did  lay  down 
(this  brick). 

8.  These  (bricks)  are  those  regions  (quarters)  ;  he 
places  them  on  the  range  of  the  two  reta/2si/'  (bricks), 
for  the  reta/zsi/^  are  these  two  (worlds)  :  he  thereby 
places  the  regions  within  these  two  (worlds),  whence 
there  are  regions  within  these  two  (worlds).  He 
lays  down  (these  bricks)  in  every  direction  :  he  thus 
places  the  regions  in  all  (the  four)  directions,  whence 
the  regions  are  in  all  directions.  [He  places  them] 
on  all  sides  so  as  to  face  each  other  ^ :  he  thereby 


^  The  word  '  apsas,'  which  western  philologists  usually  take  to 
mean  '  cheek,'  is  here  apparently  connected  with  *  ap,'  water. 

2  Literally,  '  having  stomas  on  her  back.'  Mahidhara  interprets 
'  stoma-pr/shMa  '  by  '  possessed  of  stomas  and  Pr/sh//zas.'  Sayawa, 
on  Taitt.  S.  Ill,  7,  2,  7,  by  '  (P;YshMa-)stotras  performed  with 
stomas.' 

2  '  Samyan/c '  may  either  mean  '  tending  to  one  and  the  same 
point,'  or  '  running  in  the  same  direction,  parallel  to  each  other.' 
It  is  probably  in  the  former  sense  that  we  have  to  take  it  here, 
though  not  quite  literally,  but  in  so  far  as  the  line-marks  of  these 


VIII    KAA^DA,    2    ADIIYAVA,    I    liRAHMAA^A,    lO.         2/ 

makes  the  regions  on  all  sides  face  each  other,  and 
hence  the  regfions  on  all  sides  face  each  other.  He 
lays  (the  bricks)  down  separately,  settles  them 
separately,  and  pronounces  the  sudadohas  over  them 
separately,  for  separate  are  the  regions. 

9.  He  then  lays  down  the  fifth  regional  (or  Ai-vini 
brick).  Now  that  region  is  the  one  above  ^ ;  and 
that  same  region  above,  doubtless,  is  yonder  sun  :  it 
is  yonder  sun  he  thus  places  thereon.  He  places 
this  (brick)  within  the  southern  regional  one  ^  :  he 
thus  places  yonder  sun  within  the  southern  region, 
and  therefore  he  moves  within  the  southern  region. 

10.  [He  lays  it  down,  with  Vaf.  S.  XIV,  5],  '  I 
settle  thee  upon  the  back  of  Aditi,' — Aditi 
doubtless  is  this  (earth)  :  it  is  upon  her,  as  a  founda- 
tion, that  he  thus  founds  him  (Agni) ; — '  the  holder 


bricks,  if  continued  towards  the  centre  of  the  altar,  intersect  one 
another.  As  appHed  to  the  quarters  this  meaning  would  then 
modify  itself  to  that  of '  facing  each  other.'  On  the  other  hand,  it 
is  quite  possible  that  the  meaning  of '  tending  in  the  same  direction  ' 
is  the  one  intended;  and  it  would  in  that  case  probably  apply  to 
the  flict  that  the  sets  opposite  to  each  other  have  their  line-marks 
running  in  the  same  direction,  or  are  parallel  to  each  other ;  and 
this  meaning  would  seem  to  be  imjjlied  to  the  quarters  where  the 
author  supports  his  argument  by  the  fact  that  the  wind  blows,  and 
the  rain  falls,  in  the  same  direction  in  all  the  four  quarters  (VIII, 
2,  3,  2  ;  5).  It  is  curious  that  the  expression  is  used  by  the  author 
in  connection  with  the  ajvini,  pra;/abh//t,  and  apasya,  but  not 
with  the  vaijvadevi,  the  line-marks  of  which  all  meet  in  one  central 
point,  which  is  not  the  case  with  the  others.  At  VIII,  3,  i,  11,  on 
the  other  hand,  it  is  used  again  in  connection  with  the  Di^ya  bricks, 
which,  in  the  third  layer,  occupy  exactly  the  same  spaces  as  the 
Vaijvadcvis  do  here. 

^  Or,  that  direction  is  the  one  upward  (from  here). 

^  That  is  to  say,  he  places  it  immediately  north  of  the  southern 
Sjvini,  so  as  to  fill  up  the  unoccupied,  inner  half  of  the  space  (of 
a  foot  square). 


2  8  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAA^A. 

of  the  air,  the  supporter  of  the  regions,  the 
ruler  of  beings,' — for  he  (the  sun)  is  indeed  the 
holder  of  the  air,  the  supporter  of  the  regions,  and 
the  ruler  of  beings; — 'thou  art  the  wave,  the 
drop,  of  water,' — the  wave,  doubtless,  means  the 
essence; — '  Vii^vakarman  is  thy  ^z'shi  !  ' — Vi^va- 
karman  (the  all-shaper),  doubtless,  is  Pra^apati :  thus, 
'Thou  art  fashioned  by  Pra^apati.' — 'May  the 
A^vins,  the  Adhvaryus,  settle  thee  here! 'for 
the  A^vins,  as  Adhvaryus,  did  lay  down  (this  brick). 

11.  Now  as  to  why  he  lays  down  these  Ai"vini 
(bricks).  When  Pra^apati  had  become  relaxed  (dis- 
jointed), the  deities  took  him  and  went  away  in 
different  directions.  Now  what  part  of  him  there 
was  above  the  feet  and  below  the  waist,  that  part 
of  him  the  two  Ai"vins  took  and  kept  going  away 
from   him. 

12.  He  said  to  them,  'Come  to  me  and  restore 
unto  me  that  wherewith  ye  have  gone  away  from 
me  !  '■ — '  What  will  accrue  to  us  therefrom  ? ' — '  That 
part  of  my  body  shall  be  sacred  unto  you  ! ' — '  So  be 
it ! '  so  the  A^vins  restored  that  (part)  unto  him. 

13.  Now  these  five  Aj^vini  (bricks)  are  that  same 
(part)  of  his  (Agni's)  body  ;  and  when  he  now  puts 
them  into  this  (layer  of  the  altar),  he  thereby  restores 
to  him  what  (part)  of  his  body  these  (bricks)  are  : 
that  is  why  he  puts  them  into  this  (layer). 

14.  '  Thou  art  firmly  founded,  firmly  seated,  firm,' 
he  says,  for  whatsoever  is  steady  and  established 
that  is  firm.  Now  that  part  of  his  (Pra^apati- 
Agni's)  body  was,  as  it  were,  unsteady,  unfirm  ;  and 
having  made  it  steady  and  firm  they  (the  A^vins) 
restored  it  to  him. 

15.  'Nestlike,   fat,  wise,'  he  says,  for  this  indeed 


VIII    KAA^DA,    2    ADHYAYA,    I   BRAHMAiVA,    IJ.         29 

is  as  a  nest  for  his  body. — '  By  thine  own  powers 
seat  thee  here,  a  holder  of  powers,'  he  says,  for  they 
did  make  that  (part)  of  him  powerful. — '  Thou  art 
the  Earth's  soil-cover,'  he  says,  for  that  (lower  part) 
of  his  body  is,  as  it  were,  in  connection  with  the 
soil-cover.  At  the  range  of  the  Reta/zsi/-  (he  places 
the  bricks), — the  Reta//si/C'  are  the  ribs,  for  level 
with  the  ribs,  as  it  were,  is  that  (part)  of  his  body. 
He  places  them  on  every  side,  for  on  every  side  the 
Ai-vins  restored  that  (part)  of  his  (Pra^apati's)  body. 

16.  He  then  lays  down  two  i'?/tavya'  (seasonal 
bricks)  ; — these  two,  the  7?/tavya,  are  the  seasons 
(mu) :  it  is  the  seasons  he  thus  bestows  thereon, 
[He  lays  them  down,  with  Va;\  S.  XIV,  6],  '  ^'ukra 
and  .Su/'i,  the  two  summer-seasons;' — these  are 
the  names  of  these  two  :  it  is  with  their  names  that 
he  thus  lays  them  down.  There  are  two  bricks,  for 
a  season  consists  of  two  months.  He  settles  them 
once  only  :  he  thereby  makes  (the  two  months)  one 
season. 

I  7.  And  as  to  why  he  lays  down  these  two  in  this 
(layer)  : — this  Agni  (fire-altar)  is  the  year,  and  the 
year  is  these  worlds.  Now  that  part  of  him  which 
is  above  the  earth  and  below  the  atmosphere,  is  this 
second  layer ;  and  that  same  part  of  him  (Agni,  the 
year,)  is  the  summer  season.  And  when  he  lays 
down  those  two  in  this  (layer),  he  thereby  restores 
to  him  (Agni)  that  part  of  his  body  which  these  two 
are  :  this  is  why  he  la)'s  down  these  two  (bricks)  in 
this  (layer). 


'  'I  hesc  two  bricks  are  placed  exactly  upon  the  iwo  i?/lavyas  of 
the  first  layer,  that  is,  in  the  fifth  space  from  the  centre;  see  p.  i, 
note  I. 


30  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 


1 8.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  lays  down  these  two 
in  this  (layer).  This  fire-altar  is  Pra^apati,  and 
Pra^^apati  is  the  year.  Now  that  (part)  of  him  which 
is  above  the  feet  and  below  the  waist  is  this  second 
layer ;  and  that  same  part  of  him  is  the  summer 
season.  Thus  when  he  lays  down  those  two  in  this 
(layer),  he  thereby  restores  to  him  that  (part)  of  his 
body  which  these  two  are  :  this  is  why  he  lays  down 
these  two  (bricks)  in  this  (layer). 

Second  BRAHMAivA. 

1.  He  then  lays  down  the  Vai^vadevi  (All-gods' 
bricks).  For  this  second  layer  is  that  one  which  the 
Ai-vins  at  that  time  laid  down  for  them  (the  gods) ; 
and  by  laying  it  down  they  became  everything  here 
whatsoever  there  is  here. 

2.  The  gods  spake,  '  The  Ai-vins  have  become 
everything  here  :  think  ye  upon  this  as  to  how  we 
also  may  share  in  it ! '  They  said,  '  Meditate  ye 
{/At) ! '  whereby,  no  doubt,  they  meant  to  say,  '  Seek 
ye  a  layer  (Z'iti) !  seek  ye  in  what  way  we  also  may 
share  in  it ! '  whilst  meditating,  they  saw  these  Vai^-- 
vadevi  (All-gods')  bricks. 

3.  They  said,  '  The  A^vins  have  become  every- 
thing here  :  with  the  help  of  the  A^vins  let  us  lay 
down  (bricks)  along  with  the  A^vins'  layer ! '  With 
the  help  of  the  A^vins  they  accordingly  laid  down 
(bricks)  along  with  the  A^vins'  layer,  whence  they 
call  this  the  Amns'  layer.  Hence  the  end  of  these 
(bricks)  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  former  ones  ;  for 
they  laid  them  dowai  with  the  help  of  the  A^vins 
along  with  the  Ai^vins'  layer. 

4.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  lays  down  the  All- 


VIII    KANDA,    2    AUHYAYA,    2    BRAILMAiVA,    6.         3  I 


gods'  (bricks).  These  indeed  are  those  same  All-gods 
who  saw  this  second  layer,  and  who  came  nigh  with 
that  life-sap  :  it  is  them  he  thereby  bestows,  that  is, 
all  these  creatures.  He  lays  them  down  in  the  range  of 
the  Reta/^si/C' ;  for  the  Reta/^si/'  are  these  two  (heaven 
and  earth) :  within  these  two  (worlds)  he  thus  places 
creatures ;  whence  there  are  creatures  within  these 
two  (worlds).  He  places  (bricks)  on  every  side  :  he 
thus  places  creatures  everywhere,  whence  there  are 
creatures  everywhere.  He  places  them  alongside  of 
the  regional  ones^:  he  thus  places  creatures  in  the 
regions  (quarters) ;  whence  there  are  creatures  in  all 
the  (four)  quarters. 

5.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  lays  down  the  All- 
gods'  (bricks).  When  Pra^apati  had  become  relaxed, 
all  creatures  went  forth  from  the  midst  of  him,  from 
that  birth-place  of  theirs.  When  that  (central  part) 
of  his  body  had  been  restored,  they  entered  him. 

6.  Now  the  Pra^apati  who  become  relaxed  is  this 
very  Agni  (fire-altar)  that  is  now  being  built  up;  and 
the  creatures  who  went  forth  from  the  midst  of  him 
are  these  same  All-gods'  bricks  ;  and  when  he  lays 
these  down,  he  causes  those  creatures,  which  went 
forth  from  the  midst  of  him,  to  enter  him.  In  the 
range  of  the  Reta//si/C'  (he  places  the  Vaii-vadevt 
bricks),  for  the  Reta/^si/6  are  the  ribs,  and  the  ribs 

^  The  Ajviiu  (or  Dijya)  bricks  were  placed  in  a  circle  round 
the  centre,  at  the  distance  of  a  foot  from  where  the  central  brick 
(Svayamat;7>;;/a)  was  placed  in  the  first  layer,— that  is  to  say,  in  the 
third  place  from  the  centre.  They  were,  moreover,  placed  in  the 
second  space  (or  at  the  distance  of  half  a  foot)  from  the  two  spines, 
see  p.  23,  note  i.  The  five  Vaijvadevis  are  then  placed  along- 
side of  the  Ajvinis,  so  as  to  fill  up  the  '  first  spaces,'  that  is  to  say, 
to  lie  on  the  spines  themselves;  each  of  the  two  half-foot  bricks 
laid  down  in  tlie  south  being,  as  it  were,  halved  by  the  spine. 


32  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

are  the  middle  :  he  thus  causes  the  creatures  to 
enter  him  in  the  very  middle.  He  places  them  on 
all  sides  :  on  all  sides  he  thus  causes  the  creatures 
to  enter  him. 

7.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  lays  down  the  Vai^- 
vadevi  (bricks).  At  that  time,  when  that  (part)  of 
his  body  had  been  restored,  Pra^^apati  desired,  'May 
I  create  creatures,  may  I  be  reproduced  !  '  Having 
entered  into  union  with  the  seasons,  the  waters,  the 
vital  airs,  the  year,  and  the  Aj"vins,  he  produced 
these  creatures ;  and  in  like  manner  does  this  Sacri- 
ficer,  by  entering  into  union  with  those  deities,  now 
produce  these  creatures.  Hence  with  all  (of  these 
bricks,  the  word)  sa^ush  ('in  union  with')  recurs. 

8.  [He  lays  down  the  Vaii"vadevi  bricks,  with  Va^. 
S.  XIV,  7],  'In  union  with  the  seasons,' — he 
thereby  produced  the  seasons,  and  having  entered 
into  union  with  the  seasons  he  produced  (crea- 
tures) ;— '  in  union  with  the  ranges,' — the  ranges, 
doubtless,  are  the  waters,  for  by  water  everything 
is  ranged  (distributed  or  produced)  here :  having 
entered  into  union  with  the  waters  he  produced 
(creatures);  —  'in  union  with  the  gods,' — he 
thereby  produced  the  gods, — those  who  are  called 
*gods^;' — 'in  union  with  the  life-sustaining 
gods,' — the  life-sustaining  gods,  doubtless,  are  the 
vital  airs,  for  by  the  vital  airs  everything  living 
here  is  sustained  ;  or,  the  life-sustaining  gods  are 
the  metres,  for  by  the  metres  (sacred  writ)  every- 
thing living  is  sustained  here  ;  having  entered  Into 
union  with  the  vital  airs  he  produced  creatures  ; — 

'  Lit.  what  they  (viz.  the  Vedic  hymns,  according  to  the  com- 
mentator) call  gods : — Yat  kiwXid  ity  eva  vedavada  a/('akshate. 


VIII    KAiVDA,    2    ADIIYAVA,    3    BRAIIMAiVA,    2.  33 

'for  Agni  Vai^vanara,' — Agni  Vaii-vanara  ('be- 
longing to  all  men '),  doubtless,  is  the  year :  having 
entered  into  union  with  the  year  he  produced 
creatures; — 'May  the  Ai-vins,  the  Adhvaryus, 
settle  thee  here!' — having  entered  into  union  with 
the  Ai^vins  he  produced  creatures. 

9.  'In  union  with  the  Vasus,'  he  says  on  the 
right  side:  he  thereby  produced  the  Vasus; — 'in 
union  with  the  Rudras,'  he  says  at  the  back:  he 
thereby  produced  the  Rudras; — 'in  union  with 
the  Adityas,'  he  sa)s  on  the  left  side:  he  thereby 
produced  the  Adityas; — 'in  union  with  the  All- 
gods,'  he  says  upwards:  he  thereby  produced  the 
All-gods.  These  (bricks)  have  the  same  beginning 
and  endj  but  are  different  in  the  middle  :  as  to  their 
having  the  same  beginning  and  end,  it  is  because 
having  become  united  with  the  deities  in  front  and 
behind,  he  produced  creatures  ;  and  as  to  their 
being  different  in  the  middle,  it  is  that  each  time 
he  produced  different  creatures  from  within  him. 

Third  BRAHMAivA. 

1.  He  then  lays  down  the  Pra/^abhrz't  (bricks). 
For  at  that  time  the  gods  said,  'Meditate  ye!' 
whereby,  doubtless,  they  meant  to  say,  '  Seek  ye  a 
layer!'  Whilst  meditating,  they  saw  even  that  layer, 
the  wind:  they  put  it  into  that  (fire-altar),  and  in  like 
manner  does  he  (the  priest)  now  put  it  therein. 

2.  He  lays  down  the  Pra;^abhr/ts, — wind,  doubt- 
less, is  breath  :  it  is  wind  (air)  he  thus  bestows  upon 
him  (Agni).  On  the  range  of  the  Reta/2si/6  (they  are 
placed)  ;  for  the  Reta/^si/C'  are  these  two  (worlds) :  it 
is  within  these  two  (worlds)  that  he  thus  places  the 
wind  ;  whence  there  is  wind  within  these  two  (worlds). 

[43]  B 


34  S-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAA^A. 

He  places  them  on  every  side  :  he  thus  places  wind 
on  all  sides,  whence  the  wind  is  everywhere.  [He 
places  them  so  as]  on  every  side  to  run  in  the  same 
direction  ^ :  he  thus  makes  the  wind  everywhere  (to 
blow)  in  the  same  direction,  whence,  having  become 
united,  it  blows  from  all  quarters  in  the  same  direc- 
tion. He  lays  them  down  alongside  of  the  regional 
(bricks)  -:  he  thereby  places  the  wind  in  the  regions, 
whence  there  is  wind  in  all  the  regions. 

3.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  lays  down  the  Pra;^a- 
bhms ; — it  is  that  he  thereby  bestows  vital  airs 
on  these  creatures.  He  places  them  so  as  not  to 
be  separated  from  the  Vaii^vadevis  :  he  thereby 
bestows  vital  airs  not  separated  from  the  creatures. 
[He  lays  them  down  with,  Va^.  S.  XIV,  8],  '  Pre- 
serve mine  up-breathing!  Preserve  my 
do wn  -  breathing!  Preserve  my  through- 
breathing!  Make  mine  eye  shine  far  and  wide! 
Make  mine  ear  resound!'  He  thereby  bestows 
on  them  properly  constituted  vital  airs. 

4.  He  then  lays  down  the  Apasya  (bricks).  For 
the  gods,  at  that  time,  spake,  'Meditate  ye  !'  whereby, 
doubtless,  they  meant  to  say,  '  Seek  ye  a  layer ! ' 
Whilst  meditating,  they  saw  even  that  layer,  rain  : 


^  That  is,  the  bricks  placed  in  opposite  quarters,  run  in  the  same 
direction;  see  p.  26,  note  3. 

^  The  Prawabhr/ts  are  placed  beside  the  Vaijvadevis  so  as  to 
be  separated  from  them  by  the  respective  section  of  the  anukas  or 
'  spines'  (dividing  the  square  'body'  of  the  altar  into  four  quarters). 
P2ach  Vaijvadevi  would  thus  be  enclosed  between  an  Ajvini  and 
a  Pra«abhr/t ;  but  whilst  the  Ajvini  and  Vaijvadevi  are  placed  in  the 
same  section  (or  quarter)  of  the  altar,  the  Prawabh/'/t  comes  to  lie 
in  the  adjoining  section,  moving  in  the  sunwise  direction  from  left 
to  right. 


VIII    KANDA,    2    ADHYAYA,    3    BRAIIMAA'A,    6.         35 

they  put  it  into  that  (fire-akar)  and  in  hke  manner 
does  he  now  put  it  therein. 

5.  He  put  on  the  Apasyas;  for  rain  is  water  (ap)  ; 
it  is  rain  he  thereby  puts  into  it  (the  altar ;  or  into 
him,  Agni).  On  the  range  of  the  Reta/^si/^  (he 
places  them),  for,  the  Reta/zsiy^  being  these  two 
(worlds),  it  is  on  these  two  (worlds)  that  he  thereby 
bestows  rain,  whence  it  rains  therein.  He  places 
them  on  every  side  :  he  thus  puts  rain  everywhere, 
whence  it  rains  everywhere.  [He  places  them]  so 
as  everywhere  to  run  in  the  same  direction  ^  :  he 
thereby  bestows  rain  (falling)  everywhere  in  the 
same  direction,  whence  the  rain  falls  everywhere, 
and  from  all  quarters,  in  the  same  direction.  He 
places  them  alongside  of  those  referring  to  the 
wind  2 :  he  thereby  puts  rain  into  the  wind,  whence 
rain  follows  to  whatever  quarter  the  wind  goes. 

6.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  lays  down  Apa- 
syas,— he  thereby  puts  water  into  the  vital  airs.  He 
places  them  so  as  not  to  be  separated  from  the 
Prawabhms  :  he  thus  places  the  water  so  as  not  to 
be  separate  from  the  vital  airs.  Moreover,  water  is 
food  :  he  thus  introduces  food  not  separated  from 
(the  channels  of)  the  vital  airs.  [He  lays  them 
down  with,  Va^.  S.  XIV,  8],  'Make  the  waters 
swell!  Quicken  the  plants!  Bless  thou  the 
two-footed!  Protect  the  four-footed!  Draw 
thou  rain  from  the  sky!'  He  thereby  puts  water 
that  is  made  fit,  into  those  (vital  airs). 


'  See  p.  26,  note  3. 

*  The  five  Apasya  bricks  aie  placed  immediately  to  the  right 
of  the  Pra«abhr/'ts  (looking  towards  the  latter  from  the  centre  of 
the  altar),  so  as  to  fill  up  the  four  remaining  spaces  between  the 
four  sets  of  bricks  on  the  range  of  the  Reta-^si-^. 

D  2 


2,6  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

7.  He  then  lays  down  the  AV^andasya^  (bricks); — 
for  the  gods,  at  that  time,  spake,  '  Meditate  ye  ! ' 
whereby,  doubtless,  they  meant  to  say,  '  Seek  ye 
a  layer !  '  Whilst  meditating,  they  saw  even  that 
layer,  cattle  (or  beasts)  :  they  put  it  therein,  and,  in 
like  manner,  does  he  now  put  it  therein. 

8.  He  lays  down  the  A^^andasyas;  for  the  metres 
(/Vmndas)  are  cattle  :  it  is  cattle  he  thus  puts  into 
it  (or,  bestows  on  him,  Agni).  On  every  side  (he 
places  them)  :  he  thereby  places  cattle  (or  beasts) 
everywhere,  whence  there  are  cattle  everywhere. 
He  places  them  alongside  of  the  Apasyas  :  he  thus 
establishes  the  cattle  on  (or,  near)  water,  whence 
cattle  thrive  when  it  rains. 

9.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  lays  down  AV/an- 
dasyas.  When  Pra^apati  was  relaxed,  the  cattle, 
having  become  metres,  went  from  him.  Gayatri, 
having  become  a  metre,  overtook  them  by  dint  of 
her  vigour  ;  and  as  to  how  Gayatri  overtook  them, 
it  is  that  this  is  the  quickest  (shortest)  metre.  And 
so  Pra^apati,  in  the  form  of  that  (Gayatri),  by  dint 
of  his  vigour,  overtook  those  cattle. 

10.  [He  la)  s  down  four  in  front,  with,  Va^.  S.  XIV, 
9],  '  The  head  is  vigour,'- — Pra^apati,  doubtless,  is 
the  head  :  it  is  he  that  became  vigour  ; — '  Pra^apati 
the  metre,' — Pra^apati  indeed  became  a  metre. 

11.  'The  Kshatra  is  vigour,' — the  Kshatra, 
doubtless,  is  Pra^apati,  it  is  he  that  became  vigour ; 
■ — 'the   pleasure-giving  metre,' — what   is  unde- 

'  These  are  otherwise  called  Vayasya  (conferring  vigour,  or 
vitality),  each  formula  containing  the  word  vayas,  'vitality,  force.' 
There  are  nineteen  such  bricks  which  are  placed  on  the  four  ends 
of  the  two  'spines,'  viz.  four  on  the  front,  or  east  end  of  the  spine 
proper,  and  five  on  the  hind  end  of  it  as  well  as  on  each  end  of  the 
'cross-spine.' 


VIII    KANDA,    2    ADHYAYA,    4    BRAHMAA'A,    I.         2.7 

fined     that    is    pleasure-giving;    and     Pra;''apaii    is 
undefined,  and  Pra^apati  indeed  became  a  metre. 

12.  'Support  is  vigour,' — the  support,  doubtless, 
is  Pra^'-apati  :  it  is  he  that  became  vigour;- — 'the 
over-lord  the  metre,' — the  over-lord,  doubtless,  is 
Pra^apati,  and  Pra<;'apati  indeed  became  a  metre. 

13.  'The  All-worker  is  vigour,' — the  All- 
worker,  doubtless,  is  Pra^apati :  it  is  he  that  became 
vigour; — 'the  highest  lord  the  metre,' — Pra^apati, 
the  highest  lord,  doubtless,  is  the  waters,  for  they 
(the  waters  of  heaven)  are  in  the  highest  place  : 
Pra^apati,  the  highest  lord,  indeed  became  a  metre. 

14.  These  then  are  four  kinds  of  vigour,  and  four 
metres  ;  this  (makes)  eight, — the  Gayatri  consists 
of  eight  syllables :  this,  assuredly,  is  that  same 
Gayatri  in  the  form  of  which  Praf^'apati  then,  by  his 
vigour,  overtook  those  cattle ;  whence  they  say  of 
worn-out  cattle  that  they  are  overtaken  by  vigour 
(or,  age),  and  hence  (the  word)  '  vigour  '  recurs  with 
all  (these  bricks).  And  those  cattle  which  went 
away  from  him  (Pra;fapati)  are  these  fifteen  other 
(formulas)  :  the  cattle  are  a  thunderbolt,  and  the 
thunderbolt  is  fifteenfold :  whence  he  who  pos- 
sesses cattle,  drives  off  the  evildoer,  for  the  thun- 
derbolt drives  off  the  evildoer  for  him.  And  in 
whatever  direction,  therefore,  the  possessor  of  cattle 
goes,  that  he  finds  torn  up  by  the  thunderbolt. 

Fourth  BRAMMAiVA. 
I.   'The  he-pfoat  is  viQfour\' — the  he-o^oat  he 
overtook  by  his  vigour; — 'gapless  the  metre,' — 

^  Mahidhara,  in  accordance  with  the  explanation  added  by  the 
Brahmawa  to  this  and  the  corresponding  formulas  in  the  succeeding 
paragraphs,  takes  '  vayas  '  as  a  defective  instrumental  (vayasa).  It 
is,  however,  very  doubtful  whether  such  an  interpretation  of  the 
formula  was  intended  by  the  author  of  the  Brahmawa. 


38  DATAPATH  A-BR  AH  MA;\rA. 

the  gapless  metre,  doubtless,  is  the  Ekapada:  in  the 
form  of  Ekapada  (metre)  the  goats  indeed  went 
forth  (from  Pra^apati). 

2.  'The  ram  is  vigour,' — the  ram  he  overtook 
by  his  vigour;  —  'ample  the  metre,' — the  ample 
metre,  doubtless,  is  the  Dvipada :  in  the  form  of 
the  Dvipada  the  sheep  indeed  went  forth. 

3.  '  Man  is  vigour,' — the  man  he  overtook  by 
his  vigour; — 'slow  the  metre,' — the  slow  metre, 
doubtless,  is  the  Pahkti  :  in  the  form  of  the  Pahkti 
the  men  indeed  went  forth. 

4.  '  The  tiger  is  vigour,' — the  tiger  he  over- 
took by  his  vigour; — 'unassailable  the  metre,' — 
the  unassailable  metre,  doubtless,  is  the  Viraf,  for 
the  Vira^  is  food,  and  food  is  unassailable  ;  in  the 
form  of  the  Vira^"  the  timers  indeed  went  forth. 

5.  'The  lion  is  vigour,' — the  lion  he  overtook 
by  his  vigour; — 'the  covering  the  metre,' — the 
covering  metre,  doubtless,  is  the  Ati/('X7^andas,  for 
that  covers  (includes)  all  metres  :  in  the  form  of  the 
Ati/'/t'/^andas  the  lions  indeed  went  forth.  And  so 
he  places  undefined  metres  along  with  defined 
beasts. 

6.  'The  ox  is  vigour,' — the  ox  he  overtook  by 
his  vigour; — 'the  B/^zhati  the  metre,' — in  the 
form  of  the  Br/hati  the  oxen  indeed  went  forth. 

7.  'The  bull  is  vigour,' — the  bull  he  overtook 
by  his  vigour; — 'the  Kakubh  the  metre,' — in 
the  form  of  the  Kakubh  the  bulls  indeed  went 
forth. 

8.  'The  steer  is  vigour,' — the  steer  he  over- 
took by  his  vigour; — 'the  Satobr/hati  the  metre,' 
— in  the  form  of  the  Satob/'/hati  the  steers  indeed 
went  forth. 


VIII    KAiVDA,    2    ADMYAVA,    4    BRAHMAA'A,    1 6.        39 

9.  'The  bullock  is  vigour,' — the  bullock  he 
overtook  by  his  vigour; — 'the  Paiikti  the  metre,' 
— in  the  form  of  the  Pahkti  the  bullocks  indeed 
went  forth. 

10.  'The  milch  cow  is  vigour,' — the  milch  cow 
he  overtook  by  his  vigour;  —  'the  G3.g3.t1  the 
metre,' — in  the  form  of  the  G3.g3.tt  the  milch  cows 
indeed  went  forth. 

11.  'The  calf  of  eighteen  months  is  vigour,' 
• — ^the  calf  of  eighteen  months  he  overtook  by  his 
vigour;  —  'the  Trish/ubh  the  metre,'  —  in  the 
form  of  the  Trish/ubh  the  calves  of  eighteen 
months  indeed  went  forth. 

12.  'The  two-year-old  bull  is  vigour,' — the 
two-year-old  bull  he  overtook  by  his  vigour; — '  the 
Vira^  the  metre,' — in  the  form  of  the  Vira^  the 
two-year-old  kine  indeed  went  forth. 

13.  'The  bull  of  two  years  and  a  half  is 
vigour,' — the  bull  of  two  years  and  a  half  he  over- 
took by  his  vigour ; — 'the  Gayatri  the  metre,' — 
in  the  form  of  the  Gayatri  the  kine  of  two  years 
and  a  half  indeed  went  forth. 

14.  'The  three-year-old  bull  is  vigour,' — 
the  three-year-old  bull  he  overtook  by  his  vigour ; 
—  'the  Ush;Hh  the  metre,' — in  the  form  of  the 
Ush;^ih  the  three-year-old  kine  indeed  went  forth. 

15.  'The  four-year-old  bull  is  vigour,' — the 
four-year-old  bull  he  overtook  by  his  vigour; — 'the 
Anush/ubh  the  metre,'  — in  the  form  of  the 
Anush/ubh  the  four-year-old  kine  indeed  went 
forth. 

16.  These  then  are  those  very  beasts  which 
Prai^apati  overtook  by  his  vigour.  The  animal 
he  (the  priest)   mentions  first,  then  vigour,  then  the 


40  5ATAPATHA-BRAHMAJVA. 


metre,  for  having  hemmed  them  in  with  vigour  and 
the  metre,  he  put  them  into  himself,  and  made  them 
his  own  ;  and  in  Hke  manner  does  he  (the  sacrificer) 
now  hem  them  in  with  vigour  and  the  metre,  and 
put  them  into  himself,  and  make  them  his  own. 

1 7.  Now  that  animal  is  the  same  as  Agni  :  (as 
such)  he  is  even  now  made  up  whole  and  entire. 
Those  (bricks)  which  he  places  in  front  are  his  head ; 
those  on  the  right  and  left  sides  are  his  body,  and 
those  behind  his  tail. 

18.  He  first  lajs  down  those  in  front,  for  of  an 
animal  that  is  born  the  head  is  born  first.  Having 
then  laid  down  those  on  the  right  (south)  side,  he 
lays  down  those  on  the  left  (north)  side,  thinking, 
'  Together  with  its  sides  this  body  shall  be  born.' 
Then  those  behind,  for  of  (the  animal)  that  is  born 
the  tail  is  born  last. 

19.  The  metres  which  are  longest,  and  the  animals 
which  are  biggest,  he  puts  in  the  middle  :  he  thus 
makes  the  animal  biggest  towards  the  middle; 
whence  the  animal  is  biggest  towards  the  middle. 
And  the  animals  which  are  the  strongest  he  puts  on 
the  right  side  :  he  thus  makes  the  right  side  of  an 
animal  the  stronger  ;  whence  the  right  side  of  an 
animal  is  the  stronger. 

20.  The  fore  and  hind  parts  he  makes  smallest ; 
for  inasmuch  as  those  (bricks  in  front)  are  only  four 
in  number  \  thereby  they  are  the  smallest  ;  and 
inasmuch  as  here  (at  the  back)  he  puts  the  smallest 
animals,  thereby  these  are  the  smallest  :  he  thus 
makes  the  fore  and  hind  parts  of  an  animal  the 
smallest,  whence  the  fore  and  hind  parts  of  an  animal 


1  See  p.  35,  note  3. 


VIII    KANDA,    3    ADIIYAVA,   I   BRAHMA.VA,    4.  4 1 

are  the  smallest  ;  and  hence  the  animal  rises  and 
sits  down  by  its  fore  and  hind  parts.  He  then  lays 
down  two  Lokamp;'/;^a  (bricks)  in  that  corner  M 
the  significance  of  them  (will  be  explained)  further 
on-.  He  throws  loose  earth  on  the  layer:  the  sig- 
nificance of  this  (will  be  explained)  further  on  ^ 

THE   THIRD   LAYER. 
Third  Adhyaya.     First  Brahmaa^a. 

1.  He  lays  down  the  third  layer.  For  the  gods, 
having  laid  down  the  second  layer,  now  ascended  it ; 
but,  indeed,  they  thereby  completed  and  ascended 
to  what  is  above  the  earth  and  below  the  atmo- 
sphere. 

2.  They  spake,  '  Meditate  ye ! '  whereby,  indeed, 
they  meant  to  say,  '  Seek  ye  a  layer  !  Seek  ye  (to 
build)  upwards  from  hence  ! '  Whilst  meditating, 
they  saw  the  great  third  layer,  even  the  air  :  that 
world  pleased  them. 

3.  They  said  to  Indra  and  Agni,  '  Lay  ye  down 
for  us  this  third  layer!' — 'What  wall  accrue  unto 
us  therefrom  ? ' — '  Ye  two  shall  be  the  best  of  us  I ' 
— 'So  be  it!'  Accordingly  Indra  and  Agni  laid 
down  for  them  that  third  layer  ;  and  hence  people 
say,  '  Indra  and  Agni  are  the  best  of  gods.' 

4.  He  accordingly  lays  it  down  by  means  of  Indra 
and  Agni,  and  settles  it  by  means  of  Vii-vakarman  ^, 

^  Whilst,  in  laying  down  the  Lokampr/«as  of  the  first  layer,  he 
started  from  the  right  shoulder  (or  south-east  corner)  of  the  altar 
(see  p.  22,  notei),  in  this  layer  he  begins  from  the  right  hip  (or 
south  west-corner),  filling  up  the  available  spaces,  in  two  turns,  in 
sunwise  fashion. 

2  See  VII,  7,  2,  4  seq.  ^  See  VIII,  7,  3,  i  scq. 

*  For  the  connection  of  these  deities  with  the  third  layer,  and  the 


42  i-ATArATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

for  indeed  Indra  and  Agni,  as  well  as  Vii"vakarman, 
saw  this  third  layer :  this  is  why  he  lays  it  down  by 
means  of  Indra  and  Agni,  and  settles  it  by  means  of 
VijTvakarman. 

5.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  lays  it  down  by  means 
of  Indra  and  Agni,  and  settles  it  by  means  of  Vijva- 
karman.  When  Pra^apati  had  become  relaxed  (dis- 
jointed), the  deities  took  him  and  went  off  in  different 
directions.  Indra  and  Agni,  and  Vi^vakarman  took 
his  middle  part,  and  kept  going  away  from  him. 

6.  He' said  to  them,  '  Come  ye  to  me  and  restore 
ye  to  me  wherewith  ye  are  going  from  me  ! ' — '  What 
will  accrue  unto  us  therefrom  ?  ' — '  That  (part)  of  my 
body  shall  be  sacred  unto  you  ! ' — '  So  be  it ! '  So 
Indra  and  Agni,  and  Vij-vakarman  restored  that 
(part)  unto  him. 

7.  Now  that  central  Sv3.y3.m-Atrz7ina.  (naturally- 
perforated  brick)  ^  is  that  very  (part)  of  his  body ; — 
when  he  now  lays  down  that  (brick),  he  thereby 
restores  to  him  that  (part)  of  his  (Pra^apati's)  body 
which  this  (brick  represents)  :  this  is  why  he  now 
lays  down  that  (brick). 

8.  [Va^.  S.  XIV,  11], 'O  Indra  and  Agni,  make 
ye  fast  the  brick  so  as  not  to  shake!'  as  the 
text  so  the  sense; — 'with  thy  back  thou  forcest 
asunder  the  earth,  and  the  sky,  and  the  air;' 
for  with  its  back  this  (brick)  indeed  forces  asunder 
the  earth,  and  the  sky,  and  the  air. 

9.  [Va^.  S.  XIV,  12],  '  May  Vij-vakarman  settle 


air,  see  also  VI,  2,  3,  3.  Vuvakarman  is  likewise  the  deity  by 
which  the  Vijva^yotis-brick,  representing  Vayu  (the  wind),  the 
regent  of  the  air-world,  is  settled ;  see  VIII,  3,  2,  3. 

'  See  part  iii,  p.  155,  note  8. 


VIII    KANDA,    3    ADIIYAVA,    I    BRAHMAiVA,    II.         43 


thee,'  for  Vi.^vakarman  saw  this  third  layer; — 'on 
the  back  of  the  air,  thee  the  wide,  the  broad 
one!'  for  this  (brick)  indeed  is  the  wide  and  broad 
back  of  the  air; — 'support  thou  the  air,  make 
fast  the  air,  injure  not  the  air!'  that  is,  'support 
thou  thine  own  self  (body),  make  fast  thine  own  self, 
injure  not  thine  own  self!' 

10.  '  For  all  up-breathing,  and  down-breath- 
ing.and  through-breathing,  and  out-breathing!' 
for  the  naturally-perforated  (brick)  is  the  vital  air,  and 
the  vital  air  serves  for  everything  here; — 'for  a 
resting-place  and  moving-place!'  for  the  natu- 
rally-perforated (brick)  is  these  worlds,  and  these 
worlds  are  indeed  a  resting-place  and  a  moving- 
place ; — 'May  Vayu  shelter  thee!'  that  is,  'May 
Vayu  protect  thee!' — 'with  grand  prosperity!' 
that  is,  'with  great  prosperity;'  —  'with  most 
auspicious  protection!' — that  is,  'with  what  pro- 
tection is  most  auspicious.'  Having  settled  it  \  he 
pronounces  the  Sudadohas  ^  over  it ;  the  meaning  of 
this  has  been  explained.  He  then  sings  a  saman  : 
the  meaning  of  this  (will  be  explained)  further  on  ^ 

11.  He  then  lays  down  (five)  Dii-ya  (regional 
bricks)  *.     Now    the    regional    ones,   doubtless,   are 


^  Viz.  by  the  concluding  formula,  '  Wilh  the  help  of  that  deity, 
Ahgiras-like,  he  thou  steady  !'  see  part  iii,  p.  301,  note  3. 

2  Viz.  Va^.  S.  XII,  55  (Rig-veda  S.  VIll,  69,  3),  'At  his  birth 
the  well-like  milking,  speckled  ones  mix  the  Soma,  the  clans  of 
the  gods  in  the  three  spheres  of  the  heavens.'     See  part  iii,  p.  307, 


note  2. 


'  VIII,  7,  4,  I  seq. 

*  The  five  Dijyas  are  placed  on  the  spines  in  the  four  directions 
at  the  reta/isi/^  range,  just  over  where  the  five  Vaijvadevi  bricks 
were  placed  in  the  second  layer  (see  the  sketch,  p.  24).  Between 
them  and  the  central  (naiurally-perforaied)  brick  there  is  thus  an 


44  -SATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

the  regions  :  it  is  the  regions  he  thus  bestows  (on 
the  air- world).  And  these  are  those  same  regions 
not  separated  (from  the  air)  wherewith  Vayu  on  that 
occasion  ^  stepped  nigh  :  it  is  them  he  thereby  be- 
stows. But  prior  to  these  same  (bricks)  he  lays 
down'^  both  the  bunch  of  Darbha  grass  and  the 
clod-bricks  ;  and  these  (di^yas)  being  yonder  sun  ^ 
he  thus  places  yonder  sun  over  the  regions,  and 
builds  him  up  upon  (or,  in)  the  regions.  But  were 
these  (laid  down)  at  the  same  time  (as  the  bunch  of 
grass  and  the  clod-bricks),  they  would  be  outside 
(of  the  altar);  and  outside  of  the  womb  (foundation), 
indeed,  is  that  sacrificial  work  regarding  the  fire-altar 
which    is  clone   prior  to  the   lotus-leaf'*.     When  he 

empty  space  a  foot  square,  and  the  two  southern  Dijyas  are  half- 
bricks  lying  north  and  south  of  each  other. 

'  See  VI,  2,  3,  4.  The  second  naturally-perforated  brick 
represents  the  air-world  with  which  Vayu,  the  wind,  is  most  closely 
associated. 

^  That  is  to  say,  he  laid  them  down  on  the  site  of  the  altar, 
before  the  first  layer  was  commenced,  viz.  the  darbha-bunch  in  the 
centre  of  the  '  body '  of  the  altar,  where  the  two  spines  (anuka)  in- 
tersect each  other  (VII,  2,3,  i  seqq.) ;  and  the  clod-bricks 
(logesh/aka)  on  the  four  ends  of  the  two  spines  (VII,  3,  i,  13  seqq.), 
that  is,  in  the  middle  of  each  of  the  four  sides  of  the  square  of 
which  the  '  body '  consists. 

^  The  symbolic  interpretation  here  seems  somewhat  confused, 
inasmuch  as  the  Di^yas,  which  are  now  apparently  identified  with 
the  sun,  have  just  been  stated  to  represent  the  regions.  At  VI, 
7,  I,  17  the  sun  was  represented  as  the  central  point  of  the 
universe  to  which  these  three  worlds  are  linked  by  means  of  the 
quarters  (as  by  the  strings  of  a  scale).  The  clod-bricks,  on  the 
other  hand,  were  indeed,  in  VII,  3,  i,  13,  identified  with  the  regions 
(quarters);  and  the  bunch  of  grass,  being  laid  down  in  the  centre, 
might  be  regarded  as  marking  the  fifth  region,  that  upwards  from 
here.     Cf.  IX,  5,  i,  36. 

*  The  lotus-leaf  is  placed  in  the  centre  of  the  altar  when  the 
first  layer  is  about  to  be  laid  down.     See  VII,  4,  i,  7  seqq.,  where 


VIII    KANDA,    3    ADHYAVA,    I     BRAHMAiVA,    12.         45 


now  brings  and  lays  down  these  (bricks),  he  thereby 
establishes  them  in  the  womb,  on  the  lotus-leaf,  and 
thus  these  (bricks)  are  not  outside  (the  fire-altar). 
He  lays  them  down  so  as  not  to  be  separated^  from 
the  naturally-perforated  one  ;  for  the  middle  -  natu- 
rally-perforated one  is  the  air :  he  thus  places  the 
regions  so  as  not  to  be  separate  from  the  air. 
Subsequently  ^  (to  the  central  brick  he  lays  them 
down) :  subsequently  to  the  air  he  thus  sets  up  the 
regions.  In  all  (four)  directions  he  places  them  :  he 
thus  places  the  regions  (quarters)  in  all  directions, 
whence  the  regions  are  in  all  (four)  directions.  [He 
places  them]  on  all  sides  so  as  to  face  each  other  :  he 
thereby  makes  the  regions  on  all  sides  face  each  other, 
and  hence  the  regions  on  all  sides  face  each  other  *. 
12.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  lays  down  the  re- 
gional. The  regions,  doubtless,  are  the  metres — the 
eastern  region  being  the  Gayatri,  the  southern  the 
Trish/ubh,  the  western  the  6"agati,  the  northern 
the  Anush/ubh,  and  the  upper  region  the  Paiikti ; — 
and  the  metres  are  animals  ^  and  the  middlemost 
layer  is  the  air  :  he  thus  places  animals  in  the  air, 

it  is  explained  as  represenling  the  foundation  of  the  fire-altar,  or 
rather,  the  womb  whence  Agni  is  born. 

^  That  is,  not  separated  therefrom  by  other  special  bricks ; 
though  the  full  space  of  one  brick  is  left  between  the  Dijyas  and 
the  central  brick.  Perhaps,  however,  '  anantarhita '  here  means 
'  immediately  after.' 

^  That  is,  tlie  second  of  the  three  svayam-atr?««as,  the  one  in 
the  third  layer. 

^  Uttara  seems  here  and  elsewhere  to  have  a  double  meaning, 
viz.  that  of  subsequent,  anil  upper,  or  left,  inasmuch  as  looking 
towards  these  bricks  from  the  centre  of  the  altar,  they  are  placed 
to  the  left  of  the  particular  section  of  the  anukas. 

■*  See  p.  26,  note  3. 

'  The  metres  arc  commonly  represented  as  cattle. 


46  i-ATAPATIIA-BRAHMANA. 

and  hence  there  are  animals  that  have  their  abode 
in  the  air  ^ 

13.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  lays  down  the  re- 
gionals.  The  regions,  doubtless,  are  the  metres,  and 
the  metres  are  animals,  and  animals  are  food,  and 
the  middlemost  layer  is  the  middle  :  he  thus  puts 
food  in  the  middle  (of  the  body).  He  places  them 
so  as  not  to  be  separated  (by  special  bricks)  from 
the  naturally-perforated  one  ;  for  the  naturally-perfo- 
rated one  is  the  vital  air :  he  thus  places  the  food 
so  as  not  to  be  separated  from  the  vital  air.  Subse- 
quently (to  the  central  brick  he  lays  them  down) : 
subsequently  to  (or  upon)  the  vital  air  he  thus  places 
food.  On  the  range  of  the  Reta//si/('  (he  places  them): 
the  Reta/^si/^  being  the  ribs,  and  the  ribs  being  the 
middle  (of  the  body),  he  thus  places  the  food  in  the 
middle  of  this  (Agni's  body).  On  every  side  he 
places  them  :  from  everywhere  he  thus  supplies  him 
with  food. 

14.  [He  lays  them  down,  with,  Va^.  S.  XIV,  13], 
'Thou  art  the  queen,  the  Eastern  region! 
Thou  art  the  far-ruler,  the  Southern  region! 
Thou  art  the  all-ruler,  the  Western  region! 
Thou  art  the  self-ruler,  the  Northern  region! 
Thou  art  the  supreme  ruler,  the  Great  region  ! ' 
these  are  their  names :  he  thus  lays  them  down 
whilst  naming  them.  Separately  he  lays  them  down, 
separately  he  settles  them,  and  separately  he  pro- 
nounces the  Sudadohas  over  them,  for  separate  are 
the  regions. 

^  That  is  all  (four-footed)  animals  that  dwell  on,  not  in,  the 
earth.  The  Gayatri  metre,  at  any  rate,  is  also  represented  as  a  bird 
which  fetches  the  Soma  from  heaven,  but  it  is  not  the  air  as  such 
that  is  intended  here,  but  the  face  of  the  earth. 


VIII    KAA'DA,    3    ADHYAYA,    2    BRAHMAiVA,    4.         47 


Second  Brahmaa^a. 

1.  He  then  lays  doAvn  a  Vii-va^^ryotis  (all-light 
brick).  Now  the  middle  Vijva^yotis  is  Vayu  \ 
for  Vayu  (the  wind)  is  all  the  light  in  the  air-world  : 
it  is  Vayu  he  thus  places  therein.  He  places  it  so 
as  not  to  be  separated  from  the  regional  (bricks)  : 
he  thus  places  Vayu  in  the  regions,  and  hence  there 
is  wind  in  all  the  regions. 

2.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  lays  down  the  Vi^- 
va^yotis, — the  Vi^va^yotis,  doubtless,  is  offspring  (or 
creatures),  for  offspring  indeed  is  all  the  light :  he  thus 
lays  generative  power  (into  that  world).  He  places 
it  so  as  not  to  be  separated  from  the  regional  ones  ^: 
he  thus  places  creatures  in  the  regions,  and  hence 
there  are  creatures  in  all  the  regions. 

3.  [He  lays  it  down,  with,  Va^.  S.  XIV,  14], 
'  May  Vi^vakarman  settle  thee!'  for  Vii-vakar- 
man  saw  this  third  layer ^; — 'on  the  back  of  the 
air,  thee  the  brilliant  one!'  for  on  the  back  of 
the  air  that  brilliant  Vayu  indeed  is. 

4.  'For  all  up-breathing,  down-breathing, 
through-breathing,' — for  the  Vii^va^yotis  is  breath, 


^  The  three  Vijva^yotis  bricks,  placed  in  (the  fourth  easterly 
place  from  the  centre  of)  the  first,  third  and  fifth  layer  respectively, 
are  supposed  to  represent  the  regents  of  the  three  worlds — earth, 
air  and  sky — which  these  three  layers  represent,  viz.  Agni,  Va}U 
and  Aditya  (Surya).     See  VI,  3,  3,  16. 

^  Though,  properly  speaking,  the  Vijva^yotis  lies  close  to  only 
one  of  the  Dijyas,  viz.  the  eastern  one,  it  may  at  any  rate  be  said 
to  lie  close  to  the  range  of  the  Dijyas.  Here,  too,  the  sense 
'  immediately  after,  not  separated  from  them  in  respect  of  time,' 
would  suit  even  better. 

^  See  VIII,  3,  I,  4  with  note. 


48 


i'ATAPATHA-BRAriMAA^A. 


and  breath  indeed  is  (necessary)  for  this  entire 
universe  ; — '  give  all  the  light ! ' — that  is, '  give  the 
whole  light;' — 'Vayu  is  thine  over-lord,' — it  is 
Vayu  he  thus  makes  the  over-lord  of  that  (layer  and 
the  air-world).  Having  settled  it,  he  pronounces 
the  Sudadohas  over  it :  the  significance  of  this  has 
been  explained. 

5.  He  then  lays  down  two  7?/tavya  (seasonal^ 
bricks) ; — the  two  seasonal  ones  being  the  same  as 
the  seasons,  it  is  the  seasons  he  thus  places  therein. — ■ 
[Va^^.  S.  XIV,  15],  'Nabha  and  Nabhasya,  the 
two  rainy  seasons,'  these  are  the  names  of  those 
two  (bricks)  :  it  is  by  their  names  he  thus  lays  them 
down.  There  are  two  (such)  bricks,  for  a  season 
consists  of  two  months.  He  settles  them  once  only  : 
he  thereby  makes  (the  two  months)  one  season. 
He  places  them  on  avaka-plants  and  covers  them 


THE   CENTRAL   PART   OF   THE   THIRD   LAYER. 

N 


w 


D 

"^ 

1 
1 

» 

t 

\             \ 

/ 

\ 

\ 

2 

/?/T. 

D 

\ 

1 
1 

-" S-- 

t 



D 

V 

2 

/?/T. 

\ 

1 
1 

J 

/ 

\              \. 

^             / 

D 

^ 

D 

^  These  two  i?z'tavyas  are  placed  beside  (east  of)  the  Vij- 
va^yotis,  one  north  of  "the  other,  just  over  those  of  the  first  and 
second  layers,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  fifth  space  from  the  centre.  In 
the  present  case,  however,  these  bricks  are  only  of  half  the  usual 
thickness ;  two  others,  of  similar  size,  being  placed  upon  them. 


VIII    KAA^DA,    3    ADliYAVA,    2    BKAIIMAA^A,    8.         49 

with  avaka-plants  ^ ;  for  avaka-plaiits  mean  water  : 
he  thus  bestows  water  on  that  season,  whence  it 
rains  most  abundantly  in  that  season. 

6.  Then  the  two  upper  ones,  with  (Va^^-.  S.  XIV, 
16),  'Isha  and  Urc^a,  the  two  autumnal  seasons,' 
— these  are  the  names  of  those  two  (bricks):  it  is 
by  their  names  he  thus  lays  them  down.  There 
are  two  (such)  bricks,  for  a  season  consists  of  two 
months.  He  settles  them  only  once  :  he  thereby 
makes  (the  two  months)  one  season.  He  places  * 
them  on  avaka-plants,  for  the  avaka-plants  mean 
water  :  he  thus  bestows  water  before  that  season, 
whence  it  rains  before  that  season.  He  does  not 
cover  them  afterwards,  whence  it  does  not  likewise 
rain  after  (that  season). 

7.  And  as  to  why  he  places  these  (four  bricks)  in 
this  (layer),^this  fire-altar  is  the  year,  and  the  year 
is  the  same  as  these  worlds,  and  the  middlemost 
layer  is  the  air  (-world)  thereof;  and  the  rainy  season 
and  autumn  are  the  air  (-world)  thereof:  hence  when 
he  places  them  in  this  (layer),  he  thereby  restores  to 
him  (Agni)  what  (part)  of  his  body  these  (formed), — ■ 
this  is  why  he  places  them  in  this  (layer). 

8.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  places  them  in  this 
(layer), — this  Agni  (the  fire-altar)  is  Pra^f^apati,  and 
Pra^'apati  is  the  year.  Now  the  middlemost  layer 
is  the  middle  of  this  (altar),  and  the  rainy  season 
and  the  autumn  are  the  middle  of  that  (year)  :  hence 
when  he  places  them  in  this  (layer),  he  thereby 
restores  to  him   (Agni-Pra^apati)  what  part   of  his 


'  As  in  the  case  of  the  Hve  tortoise,  in  the  first  layer;  see  VII, 
5,  I ,  II  with  note — '  Hlyxa  octandra,  a  grassy  j)lant  growing  in 
marshy  land  ("  lotus-flower,"  Weber,  Ind.  Siud.  XIII,  p.  250)/ 

[43]  E 


50  5'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

body  these  (formed), — this  is  why  he  places  them  in 
this  (layer). 

9.  There  are  here  four  seasonal  (bricks)  he  lays 
down  in  the  middlemost  layer ;  and  two  in  each  of 
the  other  layers, — animals  (cattle)  are  four-footed, 
and  the  middlemost  layer  is  the  air :  he  thus  places 
animals  in  the  air,  and  hence  there  are  animals  that 
have  their  abode  in  the  air. 

10.  And,  again,  why  there  are  four, — animals  are 
four-footed,  and  animals  are  food ;  and  the  middle- 
most layer  is  the  middle  (of  Agni's  body) :  he  thus 
puts  food  in  the  middle. 

1 1.  And,  again,  why  there  are  four, — '  antariksha  ' 
(air)  consists  of  four  syllables,  and  the  other  layers 
(i'ltl)  consist  of  two  syllables  ;  hence  as  much  as 
the  air  consists  of,  so  much  he  makes  it  in  laying 
it  down. 

12.  And,  again,  why  there  are  four, — this  Agni 
(altar),  doubtless,  is  an  animal :  he  thus  makes  the 
animal  biggest  towards  the  middle ;  whence  an 
animal  is  biggest  towards  the  middle. 

13.  There  are  here  four  /i^/tavyas,  the  Vii-vaj^yotis 
being  the  fifth,  and  five  Dii'yas, — this  makes  ten  : 
the  Vira^  consists  of  ten  syllables,  and  the  Vira^  is 
food,  and  the  middlemost  layer  is  the  middle  ; — he 
thus  puts  food  in  the  middle  (of  the  body).  He  lays 
them  down  so  as  not  to  be  separated  from  the 
naturally-perforated  one\  for  the  naturally-perforated 
one  is  the  vital  air  :  he  thus  places  the  food  so  as 
not  to  be  separated  from  the  vital  air.  Subsequently 
(to    the   central    brick)   he    lays  -  them    down  :    sub- 


^  That  is  to  say,  the  three  sets  of  bricks  are  not  separated  by 
any  others  from  the  Svayamatr/««a. 


VIII    KAiV^A,    3    ADHYAVA,    3    ]5RAHMAA^\.     T.        5  I 


sequently  to  (or  upon)  the  vital  air  he  thus  places 
food. 

14.  He  then  lays  down  the  Pra/^abhr/t^  (bricks); 
— the  Pra;/abhms  (breath-holders),  doubtless,  are  the 
vital  airs  :  it  is  the  vital  airs  he  thus  lays  into  (Agni's 
body).  There  are  ten  of  them,  for  there  are  ten 
vital  airs.  He  places  them  in  the  forepart  (of  the 
altar), — for  there  are  these  vital  airs  in  front, — with 
(Va^.  S.  XIV,  17),  'Protect  my  vital  strength! 
protect  mine  up-breathing!  protect  my  down- 
breathing!  protect  my  through-breathing! 
protect  mine  eye!  protect  mine  ear!  increase 
my  speech!  animate  my  mind!  protect  my 
soul  (or  body)!  give  me  light!' — He  lays  them 
down  so  as  not  to  be  separated  from  the  seasonal 
ones,  for  the  vital  air  is  wind  :  he  thus  establishes 
the  wind  in  the  seasons. 

Third  Brahmaa'a. 

I.  He  then  lays  down  the  AV^andasya-  (metres' 
bricks).  Now  the  metres  are  cattle,  and  the  middle- 
most layer  is  the  air:  he  thus  places  cattle  in  the 
air,  whence  cattle  have  their  abode  in  the  air. 


*  The  ten  Pra«abhr/ts  are  placed — five  on  each  side  of  the 
spine — either  along  the  edge  of  the  altar,  or  so  as  to  leave  the 
space  of  one  foot  between  them  and  the  edge,  to  afford  room  for 
another  set  of  bricks,  the  Valakhilvas. 

^  The  thirty-six  AV^andasya  bricks  are  laid  down,  in  three  sets 
of  twelve  each,  along  the  edge  of  the  body  of  the  altar  where  the 
two  wings  and  the  tail  join  it ;  six  bricks  being  placed  on  each 
side  of  the  respective  spine.  At  the  back  the  bricks  are  not, 
however,  placed  close  to  the  edge  separating  the  body  from  the 
tail,  but  sufficient  space  is  left  (a  foot  wide)  for  another  set  of  bricks 
to  be  laid  down  behind  the  A'/^andasyas. 

E  2 


52  5'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

2.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  lays  down  K/i3.i\- 
dasyas, — the  metres  are  cattle,  and  cattle  are  food, 
and  the  middlemost  layer  is  the  middle  (of  Agni,  the 
altar) :  he  thus  places  food  in  the  middle  (of  Agni's 
body). 

3.  He  lays  them  down  by  twelves, — for  the  6'agati 
consists  of  twelve  syllables,  and  the  6^agati  is  cattle, 
and  the  middlemost  layer  is  the  air :  he  thus  places 
cattle  in  the  air,  whence  cattle  have  their  abode  in 
the  air. 

4.  And,  again,  why  (he  lays  them  down)  by 
twelves, — the  6^agati  consists  of  twelve  syllables, 
and  the  Cagati  is  cattle,  and  cattle  is  food,  and  the 
middlemost  layer  is  the  middle  :  he  thus  places  food 
in  the  middle.  He  places  them  so  as  not  to  be 
separated  from  the  Pra//abh;'zts  :  he  thus  places  the 
food  so  as  not  to  be  separated  from  the  vital  airs  ; 
subsequently  (to  them  he  places  them)  :  he  thus 
bestows  food  after  (bestowing)  the  vital  airs. 

5.  [He  lays  down  the  right  set,  with,  Va^.  S.  XIV, 
18],  'The  metre  Measure; '—the  measure  (ma), 
doubtless,  is  this  (terrestrial)  world,  for  this  world 
is,  as  it  were,  measured  (mita); — 'the  metre  Fore- 
measure!' — the  fore-measure  (prama),  doubtless,  is 
the  air-world,  for  the  air-world  is,  as  it  were,  measured 
forward  from  this  world  ; — 'The  metre  Counter- 
measure,' — the  counter-measure  (pratima) ,  doubtless, 
is  yonder  (heavenly)  world,  for  yonder  world  is,  as  it 
were,  counter-measured  ^  in  the  air; — 'The  metre 
Asrivayas,' — 'asrivayas,'  doubtless,  is  food:  what- 
ever food  there  is  in  these  worlds  that  is  '  asrivayas.' 
Or,  whatever  food  (anna)  flows  (sravati)  from  these 

^  That  is,  made  a  counterfeit,  or  copy,  of  the  earth. 


VIII    KANDA,    3    ADHVAVA,    3    BRAHMAiVA,    8.         5 


■> 


worlds  that  is  '  asrivayas.'     Hereafter,  now,  he  puts 
down  only  defined  metres 

6.  'The  Pahkti  metre!  the  Ush;/ih  metre! 
the  Br/hati  metre!  the  Anush/ubh  metre!  the 
Vira^  metre!  the  Gayatri  metre!  the  Trish- 
/ubh  metre!  the  Gaga-ti  metre!'  these  eight 
defined  metres,  including  the  Vira^,  he  puts  down, 
—  [The  back  set,  with,  Va^.  S.  XIV,  19],  'The 
metre  Earth!  the  metre  Air!  the  metre 
Heaven!  the  metre  Years  !  the  metre  Stars! 
the  metre  Speech  !  the  metre  Mind  !  the  metre 
Husbandry!  the  metre  Gold!  the  metre  Cow! 
the  metre  Goat!  the  metre  Horse!'  he  thus 
puts  down  those  metres  which  are  sacred  to  those 
particular  deities, — [The  left  set,  with,  Vaf,  S.  XIV, 
20],  'The  deity  Fire!  the  deity  Wind!  the 
deity  Sun!  the  deity  Moon!  the  deity  Vasa- 
va./il  the  deity  Rudra//!  the  deity  Aditya/il 
the  deity  Maruta/^!  the  deity  Vi^ve  Deva//! 
the  deity  Br/haspati  !  the  deity  Indra!  the 
deity  Varu;/a!' — these  deities,  doubtless,  are 
metres  :  it  is  these  he  thus  lays  down, 

7.  He  lays  down  both  defined  and  undefined 
(metres).  Were  he  to  lay  down  such  as  are  all 
defined,  then  the  food  would  have  an  end,  it  would 
fail ;  and  (were  he  to  lay  down)  such  as  are  all 
undefined,  then  the  food  would  be  invisible,  and 
one  would  not  see  it  at  all.  He  lays  down  both 
defined  and  undefined  ones :  hence  the  defined 
(certain)  food  which  is  eaten  does  not  fail, 

8.  These  then  are  those  (sets  of)  twelve  he  lays 
down, — that  makes  thirty-six,  and  the  Br/hati 
consists  of  thirty -six  syllables:  this  is  that  same 
B/'/hati,  the  air,  which  the  gods  then  saw  as  a  third 


54  5ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

layer.     In  that  (brzhati  set  of  bricks)  the  gods  come 
last  (or,  are  highest). 

9.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  lays  down  these 
bricks.  When  Pra^apati  became  relaxed,  all  living 
beings  went  from  him  in  all  directions. 

10.  Now  that  same  Pra^^apati  who  became  re- 
laxed is  this  very  Agni  (fire-altar)  that  is  now  being 
built  up ;  and  those  living  beings  which  went  from 
him  are  these  bricks :  hence  when  he  lays  down 
these  (bricks),  he  thereby,  puts  back  into  him 
(Pra^apati-Agni)  those  same  living  beings  which 
went  from  him. 

1 1.  Now  when  he  first  lays  down  ten  (Pra?^abh;Vts), 
they  are  the  moon.  There  are  ten  of  these, — the 
Viraf  consists  of  ten  syllables,  and  the  Vira^^  is  food, 
and  the  moon  is  food.  And  when  subsequently  he 
lays  down  thirty-six  (AV/andasyas),  they  are  the  half- 
months  and  months — twenty-four  half-months  and 
twelve  months  :  the  moon,  doubtless,  is  the  year, 
and  all  living  beings. 

12.  And  when  the  gods  restored  him  (Pra^apati- 
Agni),  they  put  all  those  living  beings  inside  him, 
and  in  like  manner  does  this  one  now  put  them 
therein.  He  lays  them  down  so  as  not  to  be 
separated  from  the  seasonal  (bricks) :  he  thus 
establishes  all  living  beings  in  the  seasons. 

Fourth  BRAHMAivA. 

I.  He  then  lays  down  the  Valakhilyas; — the 
Valakhilyas,  doubtless,  are  the  vital  airs  :  it  is  the 
vital  airs  he  thus  lays  (into  Agni).  And  as  to  why 
they  are  called  Valakhilyas, — what  (unploughed  piece 
of  ground  lies)  between  two  cultivated  fields  is  called 


VIII    KANDA,    3    ADHVAYA,    4    BRAHMA.VA,    6.       55 

'khila;'  and  these  (channels  of  the)  vital  airs  ^  are 
separated  from  each  other  by  the  width  of  a  horse- 
hair (vala),  and  because  they  are  separated  from 
each  other  by  the  width  of  a  horse-hair,  they  (the 
bricks)  are  called  Yalakhil^'as. 

2.  He  places  seven  in  front,  and  seven  at  the  back. 
When  he  places  seven  in  front,  he  thereby  restores 
to  him  those  seven  (organs  of  the)  vital  airs  here  in 
front. 

3.  And  those  seven  which  (he  places)  behind  he 
thereby  makes  the  counter-breathings  to  those  (first 
breathings);  and  hence  by  means  of  (the  channels  of) 
these  breathings  he  passes  over  the  food  which  he 
eats  with  those  (other)  breathings. 

4.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  places  seven  in  front, — 
there  are  seven  (channels  of  the)  vital  airs  here  in 
the  front  part  (of  the  animal)  - — the  four  upper  and 
lower  parts  of  the  fore-feet,  the  head,  the  neck,  and 
what  is  above  the  navel  that  is  the  sixth,  for  in  each 
limb  there  is  a  vital  air  :  this  makes  seven  vital  airs 
here  in  front ;  it  is  them  he  thus  lays  into  him 
(Agni-Pra^apati). 

5.  And  as  to  what  seven  (bricks)  he  places  be- 
hind,— there  are  seven  vital  airs  here  in  the  back 
part — the  four  thighs  and  knee-bones,  the  two  feet, 
and  what  is  below  the  navel  that  is  the  seventh,  for 
in  each  limb  there  is  a  vital  air  :  this  makes  seven 
vital  airs  here  at  the  back;  it  is  them  he  thus  lays 
into  him. 

6.  [He  lays  them  down,  with,Va^.  S.  XIV,  21,22], 
'The   head    thou    art,   the   ruler!  steady  thou 

^  Or,  these  bricks  representing  the  vital  airs. 
*  Or,  in  the  upper  part  of  man. 


56  ^-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

art,  Steadfast!  a  holder  thou  art,  a  hold!' — 
'  A  guider,  a  ruler !  a  guider  thou  art,  a  guide  ! 
steady  thou  art,  a  steadier!'  he  truly  bestows 
steady  vital  airs  unto  him. 

7.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  lays  down  the 
V^lakhilyas, — it  was  by  means  of  the  Valakhilyas 
that  the  gods  then  ranged  over  these  worlds,  both 
from  hence  upwards  and  from  yonder  downwards  ; 
and  in  like  manner  does  the  sacrifice  now,  by  means 
of  the  Valakhilyas,  range  over  these  worlds,  both 
from  hence  upwards  and  from  yonder  downwards. 

8.  By 'The  head  thou  art,  the  ruler!'  they 
stepped  on  this  (terrestrial)  world;  by  'Steady 
thou  art,  steadfast !'  on  the  air-world;  by 'A  holder 
thou  art,  a  hold!'  on  that  (heavenly)  world. — 
'For  life-strength  (I  bestow)  thee!  for  vigour 
thee  !  for  husbandry  thee  !  for  prosperity  thee  ! ' 
There  are  four  (kinds  of)  four-footed  (domestic) 
animals,  and  (domestic)  animals  are  food  :  by  means 
of  this  food,  these  four  four-footed  animals,  they 
(the  gods)  established  themselves  in  yonder  world  ; 
and  in  like  manner  does  the  Sacrificer  now  by  means 
of  this  food,  these  four  four-footed  animals,  establish 
himself  in  yonder  world. 

9.  That  was,  as  it  were,  an  ascent  away  from 
hence  ;  but  this  (earth)  is  a  foothold  :  the  gods  came 
back  to  this  foothold  ;  and  in  like  manner  does  the 
Sacrificer  now  come  back  to  this  foothold. 

10.  By  'A  guider,  a  ruler  ! '  they  stepped  on  that 
(heavenly)  world  ;  by  'A  guider  thou  art,  a  guide  !' 
on  the  air-world  ;  by  'Steady  thou  art,  a  steadier  !' 
on  this  (terrestial)  world. — 'For  sap  (I  bestow)  thee! 
for  strength  thee!  for  wealth  thee!  for  thrift 
thee! ' — There  are  four  four-footed  (domestic)  animals, 


VIII    KANDA,    3    ADHVAVA,    4    BRAHMAiVA,     1 4.      57 

and  (domestic)  animals  are  food  :  by  means  of  this 
food,  these  four  four-footed  animals,  they  (the  gods) 
established  themselves  in  this  world ;  and  in  like 
manner  does  the  Sacrificer,  by  means  of  this  food, 
these  four  four-footed  animals,  establish  himself  in 
this  world. 

1 1.  Now  as  to  the  restoration  (of  Pra^apati-Agni), 
Those  eleven  bricks  he  lays  down  \  which  (con- 
stitute) that  first  anuvaka  -,  are  the  air  and  this  body 
(of  Agni,  the  altar).  And  as  to  why  there  are  eleven 
of  these,  it  is  because  the  Trish/ubh  consists  of 
eleven  syllables,  and  the  air  is  of  the  trish/ubh 
nature.  And  the  sixty  subsequent  (bricks)  are  Vayu, 
Pra^apati,  Agni,  the  Sacrificer. 

12.  Those  which  he  places  in  front  are  his  head  : 
there  are  ten  ^  of  them,  because  there  are  ten  vital 
airs,  and  the  head  is  (the  focus  of)  the  vital  airs. 
He  places  them  in  front,  because  the  head  (of  an 
animal)  is  here  in  front. 

1 3.  And  those  which  he  places  on  the  right  (south) 
side  are  that  (part)  of  him  which  is  above  the  waist 
and  below  the  head.  And  those  at  the  back  are 
that  (part)  of  him  which  is  above  the  feet  and  below 
the  waist.  Those  on  the  left  (north)  side  are  the 
feet  themselves. 

14.  And  the  seven  (\'alakhilyas)  which  he  places 
in  front  are  these  seven  vital  airs  here  in  the  fore- 
part (of  an  animal)  :  it  is  these  he  thus   puts  into 

^  That  is  to  say,  the  first  eleven  bricks  of  the  third  layer,  viz. 
one  svayamatr///;/a,  four  dij}as,  one  vijva^yotis,  and  four  r/tav}as. 

^  The  formulas  used  with  these  bricks,  Va^.  S.  XIV,  1 1-16,  con- 
stitute the  first  anuvaka  of  the  texts  relating  to  the  tliird  layer 
(XIV,  11-22). 

'  Viz.  ten  Praz/abh/v'ts,  see  VlII,  3,  2,  14. 


58  5ATAPATHA-BRAHMA2VA. 

him  (Agni).  He  places  them  so  as  not  to  be 
separated  from  those  ten  (Pra;/abhr/ts) :  he  thereby 
puts  in  vital  airs  that  are  not  separate  from  the 
head. 

1 5.  And  the  seven  he  places  at  the  back  (of  the 
altar)  are  those  seven  vital  airs  behind  :  it  is  these 
he  thereby  puts  into  him.  He  places  them  so  as 
not  to  be  separated  from  those  twelve  ( AVmndasyas) : 
he  thereby  puts  into  him  vital  airs  that  are  not 
separate  from  the  body.  That  same  Vayu-Pra^a- 
pati  is  turned  round  in  all  directions  in  this  trish/ubh- 
like  air;  and  when  he  lays  down  the  third  layer, 
having  made  up  both  Vayu  (the  wind)  and  the  air, 
he  thereby  adds  them  to  himself  He  then  puts 
down  two  Lokampr/;/a  (space-filling  bricks)  in  that 
corner^  :  the  significance  of  them  (will  be  explained) 
further  on-.  He  throws  loose  earth  (on  the 
layer):  the  significance  of  this  (will  be  explained) 
further  on  ^. 

THE   FOURTH   LAYER. 
Fourth  Adhyaya.     First  BRAHMAiVA. 

1.  He  lays  down  the  fourth  layer.  For  the  gods 
having  laid  down  the  third  layer,  now  ascended ; 
but,  the  third  layer  being  the  air  ;  it  was  the  air 
which,  having  completed  it,  they  ascended. 

2.  They  spake,  '  Meditate  ye  ! '   whereby,  indeed, 

^  Whilst,  in  laying  down  the  Lokampn'was  of  the  first  and  second 
layers,  he  started  from  the  south-east  and  south-west  corners  respec- 
tively, in  the  third  layer  he  starts  from  the  left  hip  (or  north-west 
corner)  of  the  altar ;  filling  up  the  available  spaces  in  two  turns,  in 
sunwise  fashion.     Cf.  p.  22,  note  i  ;  and  p.  41,  note  i. 

"^  See  VIII,  7,  2,  4  seq. 

^  See  VIII,  7,  3,  I  seq. 


VITI    KANDA,    4    ADHYAYA,     I    BRAIIMAiVA,    4.        59 

they  meant  to  say,  '  Seek  ye  a  layer !  Seek  ye  (to 
build)  from  hence  upwards! '  Whilst  meditating,  they 
saw  that  fourth  layer,  (to  wit)  what  is  above  the  air 
and  below  the  heavens ;  that  world  was  to  their 
minds,  as  it  were,  unstable  and  unsettled. 

3.  They  said  to  the  Brahman,  '  We  will  lay  thee 
down  (or,  set  thee  up)  here  ! ' — '  What  will  there- 
from accrue  to  me?' — 'Thou  shalt  be  the  highest 
of  us  ! ' — '  So  be  it ! '  They  accordingly  laid  the 
Brahman  down  here,  whence  people  say  that  the 
Brahman  is  the  highest  of  gods.  Now,  by  this 
fourth  layer  these  two,  heaven  and  earth,  are  up- 
held, and  the  fourth  layer  is  the  Brahman,  whence 
people  say  that  heaven  and  earth  are  upheld  by  the 
Brahman.  He  lays  down  the  Stomas  (hymn-forms)^ : 
the  stomas  being  the  vital  airs,  and  the  Brahman 
also  being  the  vital  airs,  it  is  the  Brahman  he  thereby 
lays  down. 

4.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  lays  down  the  Stomas. 
The  gods,  at  that  time,  said  to  Pra^apati,  'We  will 
lay  thee  down  here  ! ' — '  So  be  it ! '  He  did  not  say, 
'  What  will  therefrom  accrue  unto  me  ?  '  but  when- 
ever Pra^apati  wished  to  obtain  anything  from  the 
gods,  they  said,  'What  will  therefrom  accrue  to  us  ?' 
And  hence  even  now  if  a  father  wishes  to  obtain 
anything  from  his  sons,  they  say,  '  What  will  there- 


^  This  refers  to  the  first  eighteen  bricks  of  the  fourth  layer ;  but 
as  the  names  of  the  bricks  (ish/aka,  f.)  are  invariably  of  the  feminine 
gender,  it  is  doubtful  whether  stoma  (m.),  in  this  case,  is  meant  as 
the  designation  of  these  bricks,  or  merely  as  their  symbolical 
analogon.  In  the  former  case,  one  would  rather,  from  the  analogy 
of  other  bricks,  expect  some  such  term  as  '  stomya.'  To  the 
first  four  of  them  Mahidhara,  on  Yag.  S.  XIV,  23,  applies  the 
epithet  mrz'ty  umohini,  or  '  confounders  of  death.' 


60  5'ATAPx\THA-BRAHMAiVA. 

from  accrue  unto  us  ? '  and  when  the  sons  (wish  to 
obtain  anything)  from  the  father,  he  says,  'So  be  it ! ' 
for  in  this  way  Pra^apati  and  the  gods  used  of  old 
to  converse  together.  He  lays  down  the  Stomas : 
the  stomas  being  the  vital  airs,  and  Pra^f'apati 
also  being  the  vital  airs,  it  is  Pra^apati  he  thus 
lays  down. 

5.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  lays  down  the 
Stomas.  Those  vital  airs,  the  7?/shis\  that  saw  this 
fourth  layer  2,  and  who  stepped  nigh  with  that 
essential  element  (of  the  altar),  are  these  (vital  airs): 
it  is  them  he  now  lays  down.  He  lays  down  the 
Stomas  : — the  stomas  being  the  vital  airs,  and  the 
/?/shis  also  being  the  vital  airs,  it  is  the  7?/shis  he 
thus  lays  down, 

6.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  lays  down  the  Stomas. 
When  Pra^apati  had  become  relaxed  (disjointed), 
the  gods  took  him  and  went  away.  Vayu,  taking 
that  (part)  of  him  which  was  above  the  waist  and 
below  the  head,  kept  going  away  from  him,  having 
become  the  deities  and  the  forms  of  the  year. 

7.  He  spake  to  him,  '  Come  to  me  and  restore  to 
me  that  wherewith  thou  hast  grone  from  me ! ' — 
'  What  wall  therefrom  accrue  unto  me  ?  ' — '  That 
part  of  my  self  shall  be  sacred  unto  thee  ! ' — '  So  be 
it ! '  thus  Vayu  restored  that  unto  him. 

8.  Those  eighteen  (bricks ')   which   there  are  at 

1  See  VI,  I,  I,  i;  ¥11,2,3,5. 

'  See  VI,  2,  3,  7.  8. 

^  These  eighteen  bricks,  representing  the  Stomas,  or  hymn- 
forms,  are  laid  down  in  the  following  order.  At  each  end  of  the  spine 
(running  from  west  to  east)  one  brick,  of  the  size  of  the  shank  (from 
knee  to  ankle),  is  placed,  with  its  line-marks  running  from  west  to 
east ;  the  eastern  one  being  placed  north,  and  the  western  one  south, 
of  the  spine.     Thereupon  an  ordinary  brick,  a  foot  square,  is  placed 


VIII    KANDA,    4    ADHYAYA,     I     BRAHMAiVA,     lO.      6 1 

first,  are  that  very  (part)  of  his  (Pra^apati's)  body  ; 
and  when  he  places  them  in  this  (layer),  he  thereby 
restores  to  him  that  (part)  of  his  body  which  these 
(form) :  therefore  he  places  them  in  this  (layer). 
He  lays  down  the  Stomas  :  the  stomas  being  the 
vital  airs,  and  Vayii  (the  wind)  also  being  the  vital 
airs,  it  is  Vayu  he  thus  lays  down. 

9.  In  front  he  lays  down  one,  with  (Va^.  S.  XIV, 
23),  'The  swift  one,  the  Trivr^'t!'  he  therewith 
lays  down  that  hymn-form  which  is  trivr/t  (threefold, 
or  thrice-three-versed).  And  as  to  why  he  calls  it 
*  the  swift  one,'  it  is  because  this,  indeed,  is  the 
swiftest  of  stomas.  But  the  swift  threefold  one, 
doubtless,  is  Vayu  :  he  exists  in  these  three  worlds. 
And  as  to  why  he  calls  him  'the  swift  one,'  it  is 
because  he  is  the  swiftest  of  all  beings :  beinof 
(or,  in  the  form  of)  Vayu  it  remained  in  front, — ■ 
it  is  that  form  he  now  lays  down. 

10.  [The  back  one  \  with],  'The  bright  one^, 
the    Pa/^/'adai^a ! '    he    therewith    lays    down    that 


at  the  southern  end  of  the  '  cross-?pine,'  so  as  to  lie  on  the  spine 
(though  not  apparently  exactly  in  the  middle,  but  so  that  only  one- 
fourth  of  the  brick  lies  on  one  side  of  the  spine)  with  its  line-marks 
running  from  south  to  north  ;  and  a  second  brick  of  the  same  size  is 
placed  on  the  north,  but  so  as  to  leave  the  full  space  of  another 
such  brick  between  it  and  the  northern  edge  of  the  altar.  Behind 
(west  of)  the  front  brick,  fourteen  half-foot  bricks  are  then  laid 
down,  in  a  row  from  north  to  south,  seven  on  each  side  of  the 
spine. 

'  I'lie  formulas  of  the  first  four  of  these  (stoma)  bricks  are  not 
given  here  (in  paragraphs  9-12)  in  the  order  in  which  the  bricks  are 
actually  laid  down,  viz.  E.  W.  S.  N.,  but  in  the  order  E.  S.  N.  W. ; 
cp.  Katyay.  ^rautas.  XVII,  10,  6-9.  For  a  symbolic  explanation 
of  this  change  of  order  see  VIII,  4,  4,  i  seq. 

^  Or,  perhaps, '  the  angry  one/  The  author  of  the  Brahmawa, 
however,  evidentl}-  connects  '  bhanta '  with  the  root  '  bha,'  to  shine. 


62  i'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAA'A. 

hymn-form  which  is  fifteenfold  (fifteen-versed). 
And  when  he  calls  it  '  the  bright  one,'  it  is  that 
the  bright  one  is  the  thunderbolt,  and  the  thunder- 
bolt is  fifteenfold.  But  the  bright,  fifteenfold  one, 
doubtless,  also  is  the  Moon  :  he  waxes  during  fifteen 
days,  and  wanes  during  fifteen  days.  And  as  to  his 
calling  him  '  the  bright  one,'  the  Moon  indeed  shines: 
being  the  Moon  it  remained  on  the  right  side, — it  is 
that  form  he  now  lays  down. 

11.  [The  left  (north)  one,  with],  'The  (aerial) 
space,  the  Saptada^a!'  he  therewith  lays  down 
that  hymn-form  which  is  seventeenfold.  And  as 
to  his  calling  it  *  the  space,' — the  (aerial)  space  is 
Pra^apati,  and  the  seventeenfold  one  is  Praj'apati. 
But  indeed  the  seventeenfold  space  also  is  the  year  : 
in  it  there  are  twelve  months  and  five  seasons. 
And  as  to  his  calling  it  space,  the  year  indeed  is 
space  :  being  space,  it  remained  on  the  left  side, — 
it  is  that  form  he  now  lays  down. 

12.  [The  right  (south)  one,  with],  'The  upholder, 
the  Kkavimsal'  he  therewith  lays  down  that  hymn- 
form  which  is  twenty-one-fold.  And  as  to  his  calling 
it  '  the  upholder,' — the  upholder  means  a  foothold, 
and  the  Kk3ivimsa  is  a  foothold.  But  indeed  the 
twenty-one-fold  upholder  also  is  yonder  sun :  to 
him  belong  the  twelve  months,  the  five  seasons, 
these  three  worlds,  and  yonder  sun  himself  is  the 
upholder,  the  twenty-one-fold.  And  as  to  his  calling 
him  '  the  upholder,' — when  he  sets  everything  here 
holds  its  peace:  being  the  sun,  it  remained  at  the 
back, — it  is  that  form  he  now  lays  down ;  and  the 
forms  of  the  year  he  lays  down. 

13.  '  Speed,  the  Ash/adai-a  ! '  he  therewith  lays 
down  that  hymn-form  which  is  eighteenfold.     Now, 


VIII    KANDA,    4    ADIIYAVA,     I     IJRAHMAA-A,     I/.      6  T, 

speed,  the  eighteenfold  one,  doubtless,  is  the  year : 
in  it  there  are  twelve  months,  five  seasons,  and  the 
year  itself  is  speed,  the  eighteenfold.  And  as  to 
his  calling  it  '  speed,'  the  year  indeed  speeds  all 
beings  :  it  is  that  form  he  now  lays  down. 

14.  *Heat,  the  Navada^a!'  he  therewith  lays 
down  that  hymn-form  which  is  nineteenfold.  But 
heat,  the  nineteenfold  one,  doubtless,  is  the  year :  in 
it  there  are  twelve  months,  six  seasons,  and  the  year 
itself  is  heat,  the  nineteenfold.  And  as  to  his  calling 
it  '  heat,'  the  year  indeed  burns  all  beings  :  it  is  that 
form  he  now  lays  down. 

15.  'Victorious  assault,  the  Savi;;/i'a!'  he 
therewith  lays  down  that  hymn-form  which  is  twenty- 
fold.  But  victorious  assault,  the  twentyfold  one, 
doubtless,  is  the  year  :  in  it  there  are  twelve  months, 
seven  seasons,  and  the  year  itself  is  victorious  as- 
sault, the  twentyfold.  And  as  to  why  he  calls  it 
'  victorious  assault,'  the  year  indeed  assails  all 
beings  :  it  is  that  form  he  now  lays  down. 

16.  'Vigour,  the  Dvavi;;/^a!'  he  therewith  lays 
down  that  hymn-form  which  is  twenty-two-fold.  But 
vigour,  the  twenty-two-fold  one,  doubtless  is  the 
year :  in  it  there  are  twelve  months,  seven  seasons, 
the  two,  day  and  night,  and  the  year  itself  is  vigour, 
the  twenty-two-fold.  And  as  to  why  he  calls  it 
'  vigour,'  the  year  is  indeed  the  most  vigorous  of  all 
existing  things  :  it  is  that  form  he  now  lays  down. 

17.  'The  array,  the  Trayovi?;25a ! '  he  there- 
with lays  down  that  hymn-form  which  is  twenty- 
three-fold.  But  array,  the  twenty-three-fold  one, 
doubtless,  means  the  year :  in  it  there  are  thirteen 
months,  seven  seasons,  the  two,  day  and  night,  and 
the   year  itself  is  the   array,  the  twenty-three-fold. 


64  5ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

And  as  to  his  calling  it  '  array,'  the  year  is  indeed 
arrayed  over  all  beings  :  it  is  that  form  he  now  lays 
down. 

i8.  'The  womb,  the  A'aturviw^a ! '  he  there- 
with lays  down  that  hymn-form  which  is  twenty-four- 
fold. But  the  womb,  the  twenty-four-fold  one, 
doubtless,  is  the  year :  in  it  there  are  twenty-four 
half-months.  And  as  to  his  calling  it  '  the  womb,' 
the  year  is  indeed  the  womb  of  all  beings  :  it  is  that 
form  he  now  lays  down. 

19.  'The  embryos,  the  Pa?/>^avi;;?^a !' he  there- 
with lays  down  that  hymn-form  which  is  twenty- 
five-fold.  But  the  embryos,  the  twenty-five-fold  one, 
doubtless,  is  the  year  :  in  it  there  are  twenty-four 
half-months,  and  the  year  itself  is  the  embryos,  the 
twenty-five-fold.  And  as  to  his  calling  it  '  the  em- 
bryos,'— the  year,  as  an  embryo,  in  the  shape  of  the 
thirteenth  month,  enters  the  seasons  :  it  is  that  form 
he  now  lays  down. 

20.  '  Strength,  the  Tri/^ava  ! '  he  therewith  lays 
down  that  hymn-form  which  is  thrice  ninefold.  And 
as  to  his  calling  it  '  strength,' — strength  (o^^as)  means 
the  thunderbolt  (va^ra),  and  the  Tri;^ava  is  a  thunder- 
bolt. But  strength  also  means  the  year :  in  it  there 
are  twenty-four  half-months,  the  two,  day  and  night, 
and  the  year  itself  is  strength,  the  thrice-ninefold. 
And  as  to  his  calling  it  *  strength,'  the  year  indeed 
is  the  strength  of  all  beings  :  it  is  that  form  he  now 
lays  down. 

21.  '  Design,  the  Ekatri;;^5a  ! '  he  therewith  lays 
down  that  hymn-form  which  is  thirty-one-fold.  But 
design,  the  thirty-one-fold,  doubtless,  means  the  year  : 
in  it  there  are  twenty-four  half-months,  six  seasons, 
and  the  year  itself  is  design,  the  thirty-one-fold.  And 


VIII    KANDA,    4    ADHYAYA,    I    BRAIIMAA^A,   24.        65 

as  to  his  calling  it  '  design,'  the  year  indeed  designs 
(makes,  forms)  all  beings  :  it  is  that  form  he  now 
lays  down. 

22.  'The  foundation,  the  Trayastri;;^i'a  ! '  he 
therewith  lays  down  that  hymn-form  which  is  thirty- 
three-fold.  And  as  to  why  he  calls  it  '  the  founda- 
tion,' the  thirty-three-fold  is  indeed  a  foundation. 
But  indeed  the  foundation,  the  thirty-three-fold, 
also  is  the  year :  in  it  there  are  twenty-four  half- 
months,  six  seasons,  the  two,  day  and  night,  and  the 
year  itself  is  the  foundation,  the  thirty-three-fold. 
And  as  to  his  calling  it  '  the  foundation,'  the  year  is 
indeed  the  foundation  of  all  beings  :  it  is  that  form 
he  now  lays  down. 

23.  'The  range  of  the  ruddy  one,  the  A'atu- 
stri;;z^a!'  he  therewith  lays  down  that  hymn-form 
which  is  thirty-four-fold.  But  the  range  of  the  ruddy 
one  (the  sun),  the  thirty-four-fold  one,  doubtless,  is 
the  year  :  in  it  there  are  twenty-four  half-months, 
seven  seasons,  the  two,  day  and  night,  and  the  year 
itself  is  the  range  of  the  ruddy  one,  the  thirty-four- 
fold. And  as  to  his  calling  it 'the  range  of  the  ruddy 
one,'  the  range  of  the  ruddy  one,  doubtless,  means 
supreme  sway,  and  the  thirty-four-fold  one  means 
supreme  sway :  it  is  that  form  he  now  lays  down. 

24.  'The  firmament,  the  Sha/'tri;;25'a ! '  he 
therewith  lays  down  that  hymn-form  which  is  thirty- 
six-fold.  But  the  firmament,  the  thirty-six-fold  one, 
doubtless,  is  the  year :  in  it  there  are  twenty-four 
half-moons,  and  twelve  months.  And  as  to  why  he 
calls  it '  the  firmament '  (nakam),  it  is  because  there  is 
no  pain  (na  akam)  for  whosoever  goes  there.  And 
the  firmament  indeed  is  the  year,  the  heavenly  world 
is  the  year :  it  is  that  form  he  now  lays  down. 

[43]  r 


66  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

25.  'The  revolving  sphere,  the  Ash/a/'atva- 
Timsa.]'  he  therewith  lays  down  that  hymn-form 
which  is  forty-eight-fold.  But  the  revolving  sphere, 
the  forty-eight-fold,  doubtless,  is  the  year :  in  it 
there  are  twenty-six  half-months,  thirteen  months, 
seven  seasons,  and  the  two,  day  and  night.  And  as 
to  his  calling  it  '  the  revolving  sphere,'  from  the 
year  all  creatures  indeed  are  evolved :  it  is  that 
form  he  now  lays  down. 

26.  '  The  stay,  the  A^atush/oma  ! '  he  therewith 
lays  down  the  chant  of  praise  consisting  of  four 
stomas  \  And  as  to  his  calling  it  '  the  stay,' — stay 
means  support,  and  the  A'atush/oma  is  a  support. 
But  the  stay,  the  A'atush/oma,  doubtless,  is  Vayu  (the 
wind),  for  he  sings  from  all  those  four  quarters. 
And  as  to  his  calling  him  '  the  stay,' — stay  means 
support ;  and  the  wind  indeed  is  the  support  of  all 
beings  :  it  is  that  form  he  now  lays  down.  The 
wind  he  places  first  and  last :  by  the  wind  he  thus 
encloses  all  these  beings  on  both  sides. 

27.  These,  then,  are  eighteen  bricks  he  lays  down  ; 
this  makes  two  Trivr/ts, — the  Trivr^t  being  breath, 
and  breath  being  wind,  this  layer  is  Vayu. 

28.  And  as  to  why  there  are  eighteen, — the  year 
is  eiehteenfold :  twelve  months  and  six  seasons. 
And  Pra^apati  indeed  is  the  year,  Pra^apati  is 
eighteenfold  :  as  great  as  Agni  is,  as  great  as  is  his 
measure,  so  great  he  makes  it  when  he  lays  it  down. 

Second  BRAiiMAivA. 
I.    He    then   lays    down   the    Sprz'ta//-  (freeing 

^  For  particulars  on  the  ^atush/oma,  see  note  on  XIII,  i,  3,  4. 
^  The   ten  Spr/ta/^    are    placed  in  close  connection  with  the 
preceding  set; — viz.  at  the  front  and  back  ends  of  the  spine,  two 


VIII    KANDA,    4    ADHYAYA,    2    BRAHMAiVA,   3.         67 


bricks).  For  when  that  (part)  of  his  body  had 
been  restored,  Pra^apati  became  pregnant  with  all 
beings  :  whilst  they  were  in  his  womb,  evil,  death, 
seized  them. 

2.  He  spake  to  the  gods,  '  With  you  I  will  free  all 
these  beings  from  evil,  from  death  '  ! ' — '  What  will 
accrue  unto  us  therefrom  ?  ' — '  Choose  ye  ! '  said  he. 
— '  Let  there  be  a  share  for  us  ! '  said  some  to  him. 
'  Let  lordship  be  unto  us ! '  said  others.  Having 
bestowed  a  share  on  some,  and  lordship  on  others, 
he  freed  all  beings  from  evil,  from  death  ;  and  inas- 
much as  he  freed  (spri)  them,  therefore  (those  bricks 
are  called)  '  Sprha/i.'  And  in  like  manner  does  this 
Sacrificer,  by  bestowing  a  share  on  some,  and  lordship 
on  others,  now  free  all  beings  from  evil,  from  death  ; 
and  hence  (the  word)  '  spmam  (freed)  '  recurs  with 
all  of  them. 

3.  [He  lays  them  down  2,  with,  Va^.  S.  XIV,  24- 
26],  '  Agni's  share  thou  art,  Dikshas  lordship!' 
— Diksha,  doubtless,  is  Speech  :  having  bestowed 
a  share  on  Agni,  he  bestows  lordship  on  Speech  ; — 
'  the  Brahman  is  freed  ;  the  Trivr/t-stoma  ! ' — 
by  means  of  the  thrice- threefold  hymn-form  he  freed 

bricks,  exactly  corresponding  in  size  to  those  already  lying  there, 
are  placed  south  and  north  of  these  respectively.  Similarly  two 
bricks,  a  foot  square,  are  placed  on  the  '  cross-spine '  immediately 
north  of  the  two  stoma-bricks  lying  there.  The  remaining  six  bricks 
are  then  placed  behind  the  row  of  fourteen  '  stomas '  in  the  front 
part  of  the  altar,  three  on  each  side  of  the  spine. 

'  Or,  from  that  evil,  death. 

^  In  the  case  of  the  first  four  Spr/ta//,  as  in  that  of  the  corre- 
sponding Stomas  (see  p.  61,  note  i),  while  the  bricks  themselves  are 
laid  down  in  the  order  E.W.N.S.,  the  order  in  which  the  formulas 
are  given  in  paragraphs  3-6,  is  that  of  E.N.S.W. — Cp.  Katy. 
^rautas.  XVII,  10,  11-14.  For  a  symbolical  explanation  of  this 
change  of  order,  see  VIII,  4,  4,  i  seq. 

F  2 


68  fi-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

the  Brahman  (priesthood)  for  Hving  beings  from  evil, 
from  death. 

4.  '  Indra's  share  thou  art,  Vish;-Ju's  lord- 
ship!'— Having  bestowed  a  share  on  Indra,  he 
bestowed  lordship  on  Vish;^u  ; — 'the  Kshatra  is 
freed  ;  the  Pa;2/&adai"a-stoma  ! ' — by  means  of  the 
fifteenfold  hymn-form  he  freed  the  Kshatra  (nobility) 
for  living  beings  from  evil,  from  death. 

5.  '  The  man-viewers'  share  thou  art,  the 
creator's  lordship!' — the  man-viewers,  doubtless, 
are  the  gods  :  having  bestowed  a  share  on  the  gods, 
he  bestowed  lordship  on  the  creator; — '  the  birth- 
place is  freed,  the  Saptada^a-stoma! ' — the  birth- 
place, doubtless,  is  the  peasantry :  by  means  of  the 
seventeenfold  hymn-form  he  frees  the  peasantry  for 
living  beings  from  evil,  from  death. 

6.  'Mitra's  share  thou  art,  Varu;^a's  lord- 
ship!'— Mitra,  doubtless,  is  the  out-breathing,  and 
Varu/^a  the  down-breathing :  having  bestowed  a 
share  on  the  out-breathing,  he  bestowed  lordship  on 
the  down-breathing; — 'heaven's  rain,  the  wind  is 
freed;  the  Ekavi^/^i^a-stoma! ' — by  means  of  the 
twenty-one-fold  hymn-form  he  frees  both  rain  and 
wind  for  living  beings  from  evil,  from  death. 

7.  '  The  Vasus'  share  thou  art,  the  Rudras' 
lordship!' — having  bestowed  a  share  on  the  Vasus, 
he  bestowed  lordship  on  the  Rudras; — 'the  four- 
footed  is  freed,  the  A^aturvi^/^^a-stoma  ! ' — by 
means  of  the  twenty-five-fold  hymn-form  he  freed 
the  four-footed  for  living  beings  from  evil,  from 
death. 

A 

8.  '  The  Adityas'  share  thou  art,  the  Maruts' 
lordship!  ' — having  bestowed  a  share  on  the  Adi- 
tyas, he  bestowed   lordship   on  the  Maruts ; — '  the 


VIIT    K\NDA,    4    ADHYAYA,    2    BRAHMAATA,    12.         69 


embryos  are  freed,  the  Fau/c3iVimsa.-stoma.l' — 
by  means  of  the  twenty-five-fold  hymn-form  he  freed 
the  embryos  for  Hving  beings  from  evil,  from  death. 

9.  'Aditi's  share  thou  art,  Ptishan's  lord- 
ship!'— Aditi,  doubtless,  is  this  (earth):  having 
bestowed  a  share  on  her,  he  bestowed  lordship  on 
Pushan, — 'vigour  is  freed  ;  the  Triwava-stoma! ' 
by  means  of  the  thrice-ninefold  hymn-form  he  freed 
vigour  for  living  beings  from  evil,  from  death. 

10.  'God  Savitr/'s  share  thou  art,  Br/has- 
pati's  lordship!' — having  bestowed  a  share  on  the 
god  Savitre,  he  bestows  lordship  on  Br/haspati ; — 
'the  facing  quarters  are  freed,  the  A'atush- 
/oma  ! ' — by  means  of  the  chant  of  praise  consisting 
of  four  stomas  he  freed  all  the  (four)  quarters  for 
living  beings  from  evil,  from  death. 

11.  'The  Yavas'  share  thou  art,  the  Ayavas' 
lordship  !' — the  Yavas,  doubtless,  are  the  first  (light) 
fortnights,  and  the  Ayavas  the  latter  (dark)  fort- 
nights, for  these  gain  (yu)  and  obtain  (a-yu)  every- 
thing here  ' :  having  bestowed  a  share  on  the  first 
fortnights,  he  bestowed  lordship  on  the  latter  fort- 
nights; — 'the  creatures  are  freed,  the  A'atu^- 
^'atvari/^^i'a-stoma  !' — by  means  of  the  forty-four- 
fold hymn-form  he  freed  all  creatures  from  evil,  from 
death. 

12.  'The  y?/bhus'  share  thou  art,  the  All- 
gods'  lordship!' — having  bestowed  a  share  on  the 
y^zbhus,  he  bestowed  lordship  on  the  Visve-Deva/i ; — 

*  This  is  clearly  a  fanciful  etymology.  If  'yava'  and  '  ayava,'  in 
the  sense  of  the  bright  and  dark  fortnights,  are  really  genuine  terms, 
it  is  more  likely  that  they  are  derived  from  y u,  'to  keep  off,' — the 
bright  half  of  the  moon  being  looked  upon  as  capable  of  averting 
evil  spirits,  and  the  dark  half  as  the  reverse  of  this. 


70  5'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

'the  living  being  is  freed,  the  Trayastri;;^j"a- 
stoma!' — by  means  of  the  thirty-three-fold  hymn- 
form  he  freed  all  living  beings  from  evil,  from  death  ; 
and  in  like  manner  does  the  Sacrificer,  by  means  of 
the  thirty-three-fold  hymn-form,  now  free  all  living 
beings  from  evil,  from  death. 

13.  These,  then,  are  ten  bricks  he  lays  down, — the 
Vira^  consists  of  ten  syllables,  and  Agni  is  Vira^ 
(wide-shining) ;  there  are  ten  regions,  and  Agni  is 
the  regions ;  there  are  ten  vital  airs,  and  Agni  is  the 
vital  airs  :  as  great  as  Agni  is,  as  great  as  is  his 
measure,  by  so  much  he  thus  frees  all  these  creatures 
from  evil,  from  death. 

14.  He  then  lays  down  two  7?/tavyas^  (seasonal 
bricks) ; — the  seasonal  ones  being  the  same  as  the 
seasons,  it  is  the  seasons  he  thus  lays  down ; — with 
(Va^.  S.  XIV,  27),  'Saha  and  Sahasya,  the  two 
winter-seasons!'  These  are  the  names  of  those 
two,  it  is  with  their  names  he  thus  lays  them  down. 
There  are  two  such  bricks,  for  a  season  consists  of 
two  months.  Only  once  he  settles  them  :  he  thus 
makes  (the  two  months)  one  season. 

15.  And  as  to  why  he  places  these  two  (bricks)  in 
this  (layer), — this  Agni  (fire-altar)  is  the  year,  and 
the  year  is  these  worlds  :  what  part  thereof  is  above 
the  air,  and  below  the  sky,  that  is  this  fourth  layer, 
and  that  is  the  winter-season  thereof;  and  when  he 
places  these  two  in  this  (layer),  he  thereby  restores 
to  him  (Pra^apati-Agni,  the  year  and  fire-altar) 
what  part  of  his  body  these  two  (constitute).  This 
is  why  he  places  these  two  in  this  (layer). 

^  These  are  placed  over  the  ^/tavyas  of  the  preceding  layers, 
viz.  in  the  fifth  place  to  the  east  of  the  centre,  south  and  north  of 
the  spine. 


VIII    KANDA,    4    ADHYAYA,    3    BRAHMAiVA,    I.         7 1 


16.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  places  these  two  in 
this  (layer), — this  Agni  is  Prafapati,  and  Pra^apati 
is  the  year :  what  (part)  of  him  there  is  above  the 
waist,  and  below  the  head,  that  is  this  fourth  layer, 
and  that  is  the  winter-season  of  him  (or,  of  it,  the 
year).  And  when  he  places  these  two  in  this  (layer), 
he  thereby  restores  to  him  what  part  of  his  body 
these  two  (constitute).  This  is  why  he  places  these 
two  in  this  (layer). 

Third  Brahmaata. 

I.  He  then  lays  down  the  Sr/sh/is^  (creations). 
For   Pra^apati,  having  freed  all  beings   from   evil, 


'  The  seventeen  Sr/sh/is  are  to  be  placed  round  the  centre, 
along  the  reta/isik  range,  in  such  a  way  that  nine  bricks  lie  south 

THE   CENTRAL  PART   OF   THE   FOURTH   LAYER. 
(Seventeen  sr/sh/i  and  two  r/tavya.) 
N 


W 


r---1-  — -. 
K---» 1 


Rir. 


RiT. 


and  eight  bricks  north,  of  the  spine ;  and  that  five  bricks  form  the 
southern  side,  and  four  bricks  each  of  the  three  other  sides.  Whilst 
the  bricks  of  the  south  side  are  further  specified  as  consisting  of 
a  brick,  a  foot  square,  lying  on  the  cross-spine,  being  flanked  on 
both  sides  by  half-foot  bricks,  and  these  again  by  square  bricks  ; 
no  particulars  are  given  regarding  the  other  sides.  Most  likely, 
however,  as  indicated  in  the  accompanying  sketch,  four  square 
bricks,  two  on  each  side  of  the  cross-spine,  are  to  form  the  left 
(north)  side,  whilst  the  front  and  hind  sides  are  to  consist  of  two 


72  DATAPATH  A-BRAHMAiVA. 

from  death,  he  now  desired,  'May  I  produce  creatures, 
may  I  procreate  ! ' 

2.  He  spake  unto  the  vital  airs^  '  Together  with 
you,  I  will  here  bring  forth  creatures  !' — '  Wherewith 
shall  we  sing  praises^?' — 'With  me  and  with  your- 


square  bricks  lying  north  and  south  of  the  spine,  and  flanked  by 
half-foot  bricks. 

'  That  is,  to  the  deities  representing  the  vital  airs,  viz.  the  regions, 
&c.     Mahidh. 

2  Professor  Delbriick,  in  his  Altindische  Syntax,  pp.  136,  257, 
265,  takes  '  stoshyamahe'  in  this  passage  in  a  passive  sense — 'by 
whom  shall  we  be  praised  ? '  I  think,  however,  that  this  is  a  mis- 
take, and  Harisvamin's  commentary  certainly  takes  it  in  the  same 
sense  as  I  have  done ;  and,  indeed,  the  paragraphs  which  follow 
seem  to  me  to  make  it  quite  clear  that  no  other  interpretation  is 
possible.  Pra^apati  is  about  to  perform  the  '  sr/sh/is,'  i.  e.  the 
creation  of  living  beings  by  means  of  sacrifice  (his  own  self).  He 
requires  the  assistance  of  the  Pra;/as  (vital  airs)  in  order  to  produce 
creatures  endowed  with  breath,  and  he  also  appeals  to  (the  three 
most  prominent  of)  them  in  their  capacity  as  ^zshis  (VI,  1,1,1  seq.) 
to  officiate  as  his  (Udgatn)  priests.  They  ask,  '  Wherewith  shall 
we'  sing  praises  ? '  and  he  answers,  '  With  me  and  with  your  own 
selves/  The  'wherewith,'  according  to  Harisvamin,  refers  both  to 
the  '  stotriya '  verses  to  be  used,  and  to  the  deities  of  the  sr/sh/i- 
stotras.  That  the  former,  at  all  events,  is  indeed  the  case,  a  glance 
at  the  subsequent  paragraphs  shows,  where  the  stotriyas  are  iden- 
tified with  the  vital  airs,  and,  when  their  number  (ten)  becomes 
exhausted,  with  parts  of  the  year  (Pra^apati),  and  of  his  (the  Sacri- 
ficer's,  or  Pra^apati's)  body.  As  regards  the  deities  whom  Hari- 
svamin considers  to  be  likewise  implied,  this  also  is  by  no  means 
improbable,  though  I  must  confess  that  it  did  not  occur  to  me, 
before  I  looked  at  the  commentary.  In  the  Udgatr/"s  text-books, 
the  chanting  of  stotras  is  usually  interpreted  as  symbolising  the 
production  of 'food'  (cf.,  for  instance,  Tawa'ya-Br.  I,  3,  6,  'anna»i 
karishyamy  znna.m  pravishyamy  anna.m  ^anayishyami '),  whilst 
here  it  seems  identified  with  the  production  of  life,  or  breath  itself 
(cf.  ib.  5,  '  briliaspatis  tva  yunaktu  devebhya^  pra«aya  &c.') ;  and, 
accordingly,  in  -S'at.  Br.  X,  3,  i,  i,  7,  the  principal  vital  air,  the 
breath  proper,  is  called  '  pra^anana-prawa.' 


VIII    KANDA,    4    ADHYAYA,   3  BRAHMAiVA,   J.  J ^ 


selves  ! ' — '  So  be  it ! '  So  they  sang  praises  both 
with  the  vital  airs  and  with  Pra^apati ;  and  whatso- 
ever the  gods  do,  that  they  do  with  praise,  that — 
praise  being  sacrifice — they  do  with  sacrifice.  Hence 
(the  words)  *  they  sarig  praises '  recur  with  all  (these 
bricks). 

3.  [They  lay  them  down,  with,  Va^.  S.  XIV,  28- 
31],  'With  one  they  sang  praises,' — the  one, 
doubtless,  is  speech  :  it  is  with  speech  they  then 
sang  praises; — 'creatures  were  conceived,' — 
creatures  indeed  were  now  conceived  ; — '  Pra^a- 
pati  was  the  lord!' — Pra^apati  indeed  was  now 
the  lord. 

4.  'With  three  they  sang  praises,' — there  are 
three  vital  airs  :  the  out-breathing,  the  up-breathing, 
and  the  through-breathing :  it  is  with  them  they 
then  sang  praises; — '  the  Brahman  was  created,' — 
the  priesthood  indeed  was  now  created; — '  Brahma- 
/^aspati  was  the  lord!'  Brahma?^aspati  indeed 
was  now  the  lord. 

5.  'With  five  they  sang  praises,' — what  (four) 
vital  airs  there  are  here,  with  mind  as  a  fifth  :  it  is 
with  them  they  then  sang  praises; — 'the  living 
beings  were  created,' — the  living  beings  indeed 
were  now  created; — 'the  lord  of  beings  was  the 
lord  !' — the  lord  of  beings  indeed  was  now  the  lord. 

6.  'With  seven  they  sang  praises,' — what  seven 
vital  airs  there  are  here  in  the  head:  it  is  with  them 
they  then  sang  praises; — '  the  seven  i^zshis  were 
created,' — the  seven  7?/shis  indeed  were  now 
created; — 'the  creator  was  the  lord!' — the  creator 
indeed  was  now  the  lord. 

7.  'With  nine  they  sang  praises,' — there  are 
nine  vital  airs,  seven  in  the  head,  and  two  downward 


74  -S-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

ones :  it  is  with  them  they  then  sang  praises  ; — '  the 
Fathers  were  created,' — the  Fathers  indeed  were 
now  created; — 'Aditi  was  the  ruler!' — Aditi  in- 
deed was  now  the  ruler. 

8.  '  With  eleven  they  sang  praises,' — there  are 
ten  vital  airs,  and  the  trunk  is  the  eleventh :  it  is  there- 
with they  then  sang  praises; — 'the  seasons  were 
created,' — the  seasons  indeed  were  now  created; — 
'the  seasonal  periods  were  the  lords!' — the 
seasonal  periods  indeed  were  now  the  lords. 

9.  'With  thirteen  they  sang  praises,' — there 
are  ten  vital  airs,  and  two  feet,  and  the  trunk  is  the 
thirteenth :  it  is  therewith  they  then  sang  praises  ; — 
'the  months  were  created,' — the  months  indeed 
were  now  created; — 'the  year  was  the  lord!' — 
the  year  indeed  was  now  the  lord. 

10.  'With  fifteen  they  sang  praises,' — there 
are  ten  fingers,  four  fore-arms  and  upper  arms,  and 
what  is  above  the  navel  is  the  fifteenth  :  it  is  there- 
with they  then  sang  praises; — 'the  Kshatra  was 
created,' — the  nobility  indeed  was  now  created; — 
'Indra  was  the  lord!' — Indra  indeed  was  now 
the  lord. 

11.  'W^ith  seventeen  they  sang  praises,' — 
there  are  ten  toes,  four  thighs  and  shanks,  two  feet, 
and  what  is  below  the  navel  is  the  seventeenth  :  it 
is  therewith  they  then  sang  praises; — 'the  tame 
animals  were  created,' — the  tame  animals  indeed 
were  now  created  ; — '  Brzhaspati  was  the  lord  ! ' — 
Brzhaspati  indeed  was  now  the  lord. 

12.  'With  nineteen  they  sang  praises,' — 
there  are  ten  fingers,  and  nine  vital  airs  :  it  is  with 
these  they  then  sang  praises; — 'the  ^Sudra  and 
Arya  were  created,' — the  ^'udra  and  Arya  indeed 


VIII    KANDA,    4    ADUYAVA,    3    BRAHMA^VA,     I  7.        75 


were  now  created  ; — '  the  day  and  night  were  the 
rulers!' — the  day  and  night  indeed  were  now  the 
rulers. 

13.  'With  twenty-one  they  sang  praises,' — 
there  are  ten  fingers,  ten  toes,  and  the  trunk  is 
the  twenty-first :  it  is  therewith  that  they  then 
sang  praises; — 'the  one-hoofed  animals  were 
created,' — the  one-hoofed  animals  indeed  were  now 
created; — *  Varuf/a  was  the  lord!' — Varu/^a  indeed 
was  now  the  lord. 

14.  '  With  twenty-three  they  sang  praises,'— 
there  are  ten  fingers,  ten  toes,  two  feet,  and  the  trunk 
is  the  twenty-third:  it  is  therewith  they  then  sang 
praises; — 'the  small  animals  were  created,' — 
the  small  animals  indeed  were  now  created ; — 
'  Ptishan  was  the  lord!' — Pushan  indeed  was  now 
the  lord. 

15.  'With  twenty-five  they  sang  praises,' — 
there  are  ten  fingers,  ten  toes,  four  limbs,  and  the 
trunk  is  the  twenty-fifth  :  it  is  therewith  they  then 
sang  praises  ; — '  the  wild  animals  were  created,' 
—  the  wild  animals  indeed  were  now  created ; — 
'Vayu  was  the  lord!' — Vayu  indeed  was  now 
the  lord. 

16.  '  With  twenty-seven  they  sang  praises,' — 
there  are  ten  fingers,  ten  toes,  four  limbs,  two  feet, 
and  the  trunk  is  the  twenty-seventh :  it  is  therewith 
they  then  sang  praises; — 'Heaven  and  Earth 
went  asunder,' — heaven  and  earth  indeed  now 
went  asunder;  —  'the  Vasus,  Rudras  and 
Adityas  separated  along  with  them  :  they 
indeed  were  the  lords!'  and  they  indeed  were 
now  the  lords. 

17.  'With  twenty-nine  they  sang  praises;' — 


76  .SATAPATHA-BRAHMANA. 


there  are  ten  fingers,  ten  toes,  and  nine  vital  airs  : 
it  is  with  these  they  then  sang  praises  ; — '  the  trees 
were  created,' — the  trees  indeed  were  now  created  ; 
— 'Soma  was  the  lord,' — Soma  indeed  was  now 
the  lord. 

i8.  'With  thirty-one  they  sang  praises,'^- 
there  are  ten  fingers,  ten  toes,  ten  vital  airs,  and 
the  trunk  is  the  thirty-first :  it  is  therewith  they  then 
sang  praises; — 'the  creatures  were  created,' — 
the  creatures  indeed  were  now  created;  —  'the 
Yavas  and  Ayavas  were  the  lords,' — the  bright 
and  dark  fortnights  indeed  were  now  the  lords. 

19.  'With  thirty-three  they  sang  praises,' — ■ 
there  are  ten  fingers,  ten  toes,  ten  vital  airs,  two 
feet,  and  the  trunk  is  the  thirty-third  :  it  is  therewith 
they  then  sang  praises; — 'the  living  beings  lay 
quiet,' — all  living  beings  now  indeed  lay  quiet; — 
'  Pra^apati,  the  supreme,  was  the  lord!' — 
Pra^apati,  the  supreme,  indeed  was  now  the  lord. 

20.  These,  then,  are  seventeen  bricks  he  lays 
down, — the  year,  Pra^apati,  is  seventeenfold,  he  is 
the  progenitor  :  it  is  thus  by  this  seventeenfold  year, 
by  Pra^apati,  the  progenitor,  that  he  caused  these 
creatures  to  be  generated.  And  what  he  generated, 
he  created ;  and  inasmuch  as  he  created  (s;7^), 
therefore  they  are  called  creations  (sr/sh/i).  Having 
created  them,  he  made  them  enter  his  own  self:  and 
in  like  manner  does  the  Sacrificer  now  cause  these 
creatures  to  be  generated  by  that  seventeenfold  year, 
by  Pra,^apati,  the  progenitor;  and  having  created 
them,  he  makes  them  enter  his  own  self.     On  the 


'  That  is,  he  makes  them  pass  into  his  own  power,  makes  them 
his  own. 


VIII    KAA'DA,    4    ADHYAYA,    4    BRAIIMAA^A,   2.         ']'] 

range  of  the  Reta//si/6  (he  lays  down  these  bricks) : 
the  Reta/^si/^  behig  the  ribs,  and  the  ribs  the  middle 
(of  the  body),  it  is  in  the  very  middle  that  he  causes 
these  creatures  to  enter  him.  He  lays  them  on  all 
sides  :  from  all  sides  he  thus  makes  these  creatures 
to  enter  him. 

Fourth  Brahmaa^a. 

1.  Now,  then,  as  to  the  order  of  proceeding. 
That  (brick)  which  contains  the  Trivr/t  (thrice- 
threefold  stoma)  he  places  in  front,  that  containing  the 
twenty-one-fold  (stoma)  at  the  back,  that  containing 
the  fifteenfold  (stoma)  on  the  right  (south)  side,  that 
containing  the  seventeenfold  (stoma)  on  the  left 
(north)  side. 

2.  Now  when  the  one  containing  the  Trivr/t  had 
been  laid  down,  Death  lay  in  wait  for  Pra^apati  in 
the  one  (on  the  south  side)  containing  the  fifteenfold 
(stoma),  thinking,  '  After  that  he  will  lay  down  this 
one:  I  will  here  seize  upon  him!'  He  (Pra^apati) 
was  aware  of  him,  and  having  seen  him,  he  walked 
round  and  laid  down  (at  the  back)  the  (brick)  con- 
taining the  twenty-one-fold  (stoma).  Death  came 
thither,  and  he  (Pra^^apati)  laid  down  the  one  (on  the 
south  side)  containing  the  fifteenfold  (stoma).  Death 
came  to  the  fifteenfold  one,  and  he  (Pra^apati)  laid 
down  the  one  (on  the  north  side)  containing  the 
seventeenfold  (stoma).  It  was  here  ^  that  he  put 
down  and  confounded  Death  ;  and  in  like  manner 
does  the  Sacrificer  now  put  down  and  confound  all 
evils. 

^  That  is,  in  the  laying  down  of  these  bricks.     For  the  order 
followed  in  laying  down  the  bricks,  see  also  p.  67,  note  2. 


78  S-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiV^A. 

3.  Then  as  to  the  subsequent  (bricks).  Alongside 
of  the  one  (in  front)  containing  the  Tnvrz't  he  lays 
down  one  containing  the  Trivr/t ;  alongside  of  that 
(at  the  back)  containing  the  Eka.vimsa.  (he  lays  down) 
one  containing  the  EksiVimsR ;  alongside  of  that  (on 
the  south,  or  right,  side)  containing  the  Fau/iadsisa  (he 
lays  down)  one  containing  the  Saptada^a ;  alongside 
of  that  (on  the  north,  or  left,  side)  containing  the 
Saptada^a  (he  lays  down)  one  containing  the 
Pa;/X'ada^a.  And  because  he  thus  changes  in  laying 
them  down  \  therefore  they  (the  bricks)  are  of 
diverse  stomas ;  and  because  these  stomas  are  then 
otherwise  with  regard  to  the  former  ones  -,  therefore 
also  they  (the  bricks)  are  of  diverse  stomas.  And 
in  this  way  the  gods  laid  them  dow^n,  and  otherwise 
the  Asuras  ;  whereupon  the  gods  succeeded,  and  the 
Asuras  came  to  naught :  he  who  knows  this,  succeeds 
of  himself,  and  his  hateful  enemy  comes  to  naught. 

4.  Now,  this  Agni  (fire-altar)  is  an  animal,  and  he 
is  made  up  (restored)  here  whole  and  entire.  His 
head  is  the  two  (bricks)  containing  the  Trivrzt ;  and 
as  to  why  these  two  are  such  as  contain  the  Trivrzt, 
— the  head  is  threefold  {tnvrzt).  There  are  two  of 
them,  because  the  head  consists  of  two  bones 
(kapala).  He  lays  them  down  in  front,  for  this  head 
is  in  the  front  (of  the  animal). 

5.  The  two  (behind)  containing  the  Ekavi;;z^a  are 
the  foundation  (the  feet).  And  as  to  why  these  are 
such   as  contain    the   Ekavi7;/^a, — the   Ekavi;;2^a  is 

^  The  Sanskrit  text,  as  usual,  makes  our  gerundial  clause  the 
principal  clause  :  '  because  he  la}'s  them  down  in  changing  them.' 

2  On  the  south  side  a  Spn't  representing  the  Saptada^-a  is 
placed  immediately  north  of  a  stoma  (brick)  representing  the 
Pa;7/^adaja;  and  vice  versa  on  the  north  (left)  side. 


Vni    KANDA,    4    ADHYAYA,    4    BRAHMAiVA,  8.  79 


a  foundation.  There  are  two  of  them,  because  the 
foundation  is  a  pair  (of  feet).  He  places  them 
behind,  because  this  foundation  (the  hind-feet)  is 
behind. 

6.  The  two  containing  the  Pa?7/C'ada5a  ^  are  the 
arms  (or  fore-feet).  And  as  to  why  these  are  such 
as  contain  the  Pa;7/'ada5a, — the  arms  are  fifteenfold. 
There  are  two  of  them,  because  these  arms  are  two. 
He  places  them  on  the  sides,  because  these  two 
arms  are  at  the  sides. 

7.  The  two  containing  the  Saptada^-a  are  food. 
And  as  to  why  they  are  such  as  contain  the  Sapta- 
da^a, — food  is  seventeenfold.  There  are  two  of  them, 
because  'anna'  (food)  has  two  syllables.  He  lays 
them  down  close  to  those  containing  the  Paw/^ada^a  : 
he  thus  puts  the  food  close  to  the  arms.  Those 
containing  the  Vail^adass.  are  on  the  outside,  and 
those  containing  the  Saptada^a  on  the  inside :  he 
thus  encloses  the  food  on  both  sides  by  the  arms. 

8.  And  those  he  places  in  the  middle  are  the 
body  (trunk).  He  places  them  on  the  range  of  the 
Reta//si/C'  (bricks),  for— the  Reta//si/^  being  the  ribs, 
and  the  ribs  being  the  middle  (of  the  body) — this 
body  is  in  the  middle  (of  the  limbs)  I  He  places  them 
in  every  direction,  for  this  body  (extends)  in  every 
direction.  And  as  to  what  other  (space)  there  is 
besides  this,  that  is  left  over ;— and  what  is  left  over 
for  the  o^ods,  that  is  these  metres ; — and  as  to  these 


^  Viz.  the  southern  one  of  the  two  on  the  south  (right)  side,  and 
the  northern  one  of  the  two  on  the  north  (left)  side. 

2  Atha  ya  madhya  upadadhali  sa  atma,  ta  reta//si,tor  velayo- 
padadhati— pr/sh/ayo  vai  reta/^siX-au,  madhyam  u  pr/sh/ayo— 
madhyato  hy  ayam  atma.— Here  the  two  clauses  with  'vai'  are 
inserted  to  substantiate  the  reason  introduced  by  '  hi.' 


8o  5ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

metres,  they  are  cattle ; — and  as  to  cattle,  they  are 
(objects  of)  good  fortune  ; — and  as  to  these  (objects 
of)  good  fortune,  they  are  yonder  sun  :  he  is  that  one 
to  the  south  of  them. 

9.  Now  some  lay  down  these  (rows  of  bricks  ^) 
immediately  after  the  two  containing  the  Tnvrzt, 
saying,  '  They  are  the  tongue  and  the  jaws :  those 
fourteen  are  the  jaws,  and  those  six  are  the  tongue.' 
Let  him  not  do  so  :  they  cause  a  redundancy, — it 
would  be  just  as  if  one  were  to  put  two  other  jaws 
to  the  already  existing  jaws,  as  if  one  were  to  put 
another  tongue  to  the  already  existing  tongue.  That 
(brick)  wherein  the  head  is  indeed  (includes)  the  jaws 
and  the  tongue. 

10.  Now  some  lay  down  (these  bricks)  in  the 
intermediate  (south-eastern)  space  of  it  (the  altar)  ^ 
saying,  '  This  is  the  sun  :  we  thus  place  yonder  sun 
in  that  direction.'  Let  him  not  do  so  :  surely  there 
are  those  other  rites  ^  by  which  he  places  him  in 
that  (direction). 

11.  Some,  again,   lay  them   down   on   the    right 


^  Viz.  the  row  of  fourteen  bricks  lying  behind  the  two  front 
bricks,  and  the  row  of  six  bricks  again  placed  behind  these.  It  will 
be  remembered  that  only  the  northern  one  of  the  two  front  bricks 
was  laid  down  at  first,  and  that  then  three  others  were  placed  in 
the  different  directions,  after  which  the  row  of  fourteen  was  laid 
down  behind  the  front  one ;  and  similarly  the  laying  down  of  the 
second  front  brick  was  separated  from  that  of  the  second  row  by 
the  laying  down  of  three  other  bricks  in  the  different  quarters. 

2  In  that  case,  the  two  shank-sized  bricks  are  laid  down  in  the 
south-east  corner,  and  the  rows  of  smaller  bricks  are  placed  to  the 
north  of  them.     See  Katy.  ^Srauias.  XIV,  10,  4. 

*  See,  for  instance,  VI,  7,  3,  9  where  the  Ukhya  Agni,  re- 
presenting the  sun,  is  held  up  by  the  AgniX'it  (sacrificer)  in  the 
south-easterly  direction.     The  south-east  corner  is  sacred  to  Agni. 


VIII    KA^DA,    4   ADHYAYA,    4    BRAHMAATA,    12.        81 


(south  1)  side,  saying, 'We  thus  place  these  signs  of 
good  fortune  (pu;/jya  lakshmi)  on  the  right  side  : ' 
whence  he  who  has  a  mark  -  (lakshman)  on  his  right 
side  is  said  to  have  good  luck  (pu/^ya-lakshmika), 
and  on  the  left  side  in  the  case  of  a  woman  =^;  for  the 
woman  has  her  position  on  the  left  side  (of  the  man) : 
therefore  it  is  done  thus.  But  let  him  place  them 
in  front ;  for  where  the  head  is  there  are  also  the 
jaws  and  the  tongue  :  and  thus  he  places  the  signs 
of  good  fortune  at  the  head  (or,  in  the  mouth, 
mukhata/^),  whence  they  say  that  he  who  has  a 
(peculiar)  mark  in  his  mouth  *  has  good  luck. 

12.  This,  indeed,  is  Brahman's  layer:  inasmuch 
as  they  (the  gods)  laid  down  the  Brahman ^  therefore- 
it  is  Brahman's  layer.  It  is  Pra^apati's  layer  :  inas- 
much as  they  laid  down  Pra^apati ",  it  is  Pra^apati's 
layer.  It  is  the  y?/shis'  layer:  inasmuch  as  they 
laid  down  the  jRz'shis",  it  is  the  i'^/shis'  layer.  It  is 
Vayu's  layer:  inasmuch  as  they  laid  down  Vayu  ^ 
it  is  Vayu's  layer.  It  is  the  Stomas'  layer:  inasmuch 
as  they  laid  down  the  hymn-forms  ^  it  is  the  Stomas' 


'  In  that  case,  they  are  laid  down  north  of  the  two  bricks  lying 
on  the  southern  end  of  the  cross-spine,  first  the  row  of  fourteen, 
and  then,  north  of  these,  the  row  of  six. 

^  Yasya  dakshiwapar^ve  kikshawaz/z  kayasya  va  var«e  va  kiwta- 
ratmakawi  (?)  bhavati ;  comm. 

^  This  clause  is  rather  abrupt,  and  is,  moreover,  hardly  logical. 
It  is  not  clear  whether  it  is  the  two  soutiiern  bricks  that  are  com- 
pared with  the  woman,  or  the  bricks  to  be  placed  alongside  of 
them  on  the  north  (left)  side. 

*  Viz.  such  as  an  excess  of  sharp  teeth  (incisors) — yasya  mukha- 
laksha7;aw  dakshiwada/z/sh/ratirekadi  bhavati ;  comm. 


»  See  VIII,  4,  1,3. 

«  See  VIII,  4,  I.  4 

'SeeVIII,  4,  1,5. 

«  See  VIII,  4,  I,  8. 

'  See  VIII,  4,  I,  4  seq. 

[43] 

G 

82  S-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAA^A. 


layer.  It  is  the  layer  of  the  vital  airs  :  inasmuch  as 
they  laid  down  the  vital  airs  \  it  is  the  layer  of  the 
vital  airs.  Hence,  whatsoever  one  may  know,  that 
comes  to  be  included  in  the  ancestry,  in  the  kinship  ^ 
of  this  layer. — He  then  lays  down  two  Lokamp/'/;^as 
(space-filling  bricks)  in  that  corner  ^i  the  significance 
of  these  (will  be  explained)  farther  on  ^  He  throws 
loose  soil  thereon  :  the  significance  of  this  (will  be 
explained)  farther  on  ^ 

THE  FIFTH   LAYER. 
Fifth  Adhyaya.     First  BRAHMAivA. 

1.  He  lays  down  the  fifth  layer.  For  now,  having 
laid  down  the  fourth  layer,  the  gods  mounted  it, — 
having  completed  what  is  above  the  air,  and  below 
the  sky,  they  mounted  it. 

2.  They  spake,  '  Meditate  ye  (/^etay) ! '  whereby, 
doubtless,  they  meant  to  say,  'Seek  ye  a  layer  {^\t\)\ 
Seek  ye  fi-om  hence  upwards  ! '  Whilst  meditating, 
they  saw  that  fifth  layer,  the  far-shining  heaven : 
that  world  pleased  them. 

3.  They  desired,  'Would  that  we  could  make 
that  world  foeless,  undisturbed ! '  They  spake, 
'  Think  ye  upon  this,  how  we  shall  make  this  world 


'  See  Vni,  4,  I,  5- 

*  Or,  in  the  (symbolic)  meaning.  The  literal  reading  of  the 
clause  is, — '  Thereby  this  layer  of  his  becomes  possessed  of  an 
ancestry  and  kinship  (or  mystic  sense).' 

^  Viz.  in  the  north-east  corner,  or  on  the  left  shoulder,  whence, 
in  two  turns,  the  available  spaces  of  the  altar  are  filled  up.  In 
laying  down  the  Lokampr/was  of  the  first  three  layers  he  started 
from  the'  south-east,  the  south-west,  and  the  north-west  corners 
respectively.     Cf.  p.  22,  note  i;  p.  41,  note  i;  p.  58,  note  i. 

*  See  VIII,  7,  2,  4  seq.  ^  See  VIII,  7,  3,  i  seq. 


VIII    KAiVDA,    5    ADHYAYA,     I     BRAHMAiVA,    6.        8^ 

foeless,  undisturbed  ! '  They  spake,  *  Meditate  ye  ! ' 
whereby,  indeed,  they  meant  to  say,  '  Seek  ye  a 
layer !  Seek  ye  how  we  shall  make  this  world 
foeless,  undisturbed ! ' 

4.  Whilst  meditating,  they  saw  these  Asapatna 
('  foeless ')  bricks  ;  they  laid  them  down,  and  by 
means  of  them  they  made  that  world  foeless,  un- 
disturbed ;  and  because  by  means  of  them  they 
made  that  world  foeless,  undisturbed,  these  (are 
called)  Asapatnas.  And  in  like  manner  does  the 
Sacrificer,  by  laying  them  down,  now  make  that 
world  foeless,  undisturbed.  On  all  (four)  sides  he 
lays  them  down  :  on  all  sides  he  thus  makes  that 
world  foeless,  undisturbed.  He  places  them  on  the 
other  side  :  he  thereby  makes  that  whole  world  foe- 
less, undisturbed. 

5.  He  then  lays  down  the  Vira^^s^  (far-shining 
bricks):  this  Vira^,  indeed,  is  that  far-shining  (vira^) 
fifth  layer  which  the  gods  saw.  He  lays  them  down 
by  tens  :  the  Viraf  (metre)  consists  of  ten  syllables, 
and  this  layer  is  '  vira,f .'  He  places  them  on  every 
side  ;  for  he  who  shines  (rules)  in  one  direction  only, 
does  not  shine  far  and  wide,  but  whosoever  shines  in 
all  directions,  he  alone  shines  far  and  wide. 

6.  And  as  to  why  he  lays  down  those  Asapatnas. 
Now  at  that  time,  when  that  (part)  of  his  bod}^  had 
been  restored,  evil  beset  Pra^apati  on  every  side. 
He  saw  those  foeless  bricks,  and  laid  them  down, 
and  by  means  of  them  he  drove  off  evil,  for  foe  means 
evil ;  and  because,  by  means  of  them  he  drove  off  the 
foe,  evil,  therefore  they  are  (called)  '  foeless '  (bricks). 

'  For  particulars  respecting  these,  also  called  ^//andasya^,  see 
VIII,  5,  2,  I,  seq. 

G  2 


84  -SATAPATUA-BRAHMAA^A. 

7.  And  what  the  gods  did,  the  same  is  done  now. 
Evil,  indeed,  does  not  now  beset  this  (Sacrificer), 
but  when  he  now  does  this,  it  is  that  he  wants 
to  do  what  the  gods  did  ;  and  he  thereby  drives  off 
whatever  evil,  whatever  foe  besets  him  ;  and  be- 
cause, by  means  of  them,  he  drives  off  the  foe,  evil, 
therefore  they  are  (called)  the  '  foeless '  (bricks). 
He  places  them  on  every  side  :  he  thereby  drives 
off  the  foe,  evil,  on  every  side.  He  places  them  on 
the  other  side :  from  his  whole  self  he  thereby  drives 
off  the  foe,  evil. 

8.  He  lays  down  (one)  in  front  \  with  (Va^.  S. 
XV,  i),  'O  Agni,  drive  away  the  foes  of  ours 
that  are  born,  drive  back  those  unborn,  O 
knower  of  beings!  cheer  us,  kindly  and  un- 
frowning  !  may  we  be  in  thy  threefold-shelter- 
ing, steadfast  protection!'  as  the  text  so  the 
sense.  Then  behind,  with  (Va^.  S.  XV,  2),  'With 
might  drive  away  the  foes  of  ours  that  are  born, 

^  The  first  four  of  the  five  Asapatnas  are  laid  down  near  the 
four  ends  of  the  spines  (in  the  order  east,  west,  south,  north) ;  their 
exact  place  being  the  second  space  on  the  left  side  of  the  spine  (in 
looking  towards  them  from  the  centre),  that  is  to  say,  the  space  of 
one  (?  or  half  a)  foot  being  left  between  them  and  the  respective 
spine.  Their  position  thus  is  the  same  as  those  of  the  Ajvinis  in 
the  second  layer  (see  p.  31,  note  i)  except  that  these  were  placed 
on  the  Reta/isi^  range  instead  of  at  the  ends  of  the  spines.  The 
line-marks  of  these  four  bricks  run  parallel  to  the  respective  spines. 
The  fifth  Asapatna  is  thus  laid  down  north  of  the  southern  one,  so 
as  to  leave  the  space  of  a  cubit  (about  a  foot  and  a  half)  between 
them.  These  latter  two  Asapatnas  are  full-sized  bricks  (one  foot 
square),  and  not  half-sized,  as  were  the  two  southern  A^vinis. 
Moreover,  whilst  the  southern  Asapatna  has  its  line-marks  running 
parallel  to  the  adjoining  cross-spine  (south  to  north),  the  fifth 
Asapatna  has  them  running  from  west  to  east  (?  as  well  as  from 
south  to  north). 


VIII    KANDA,    5    ADHYAYA,     I     BRAHMA2VA,    12.        85 

drive  back,  O  knower  of  beings,  those  unborn  ! 
cheer  us  with  kindly  feeling!  may  we  prevail! 
drive  off  our  foes  ! '  as  the  text  so  the  sense. 

9.  That  which  is  (placed)  in  front  is  Agni,  and 
that  behind  is  Agni :  with  Agni  he  (Pra^apati)  then 
drove  away  evil  both  in  front  and  in  the  rear ;  and 
in  like  manner  now  does  the  Sacrificer  with  Agni 
drive  away  evil  both  in  front  and  in  the  rear. 

10.  Then  on  the  right  (south)  side,  with  (Va^.  S. 
XV,  3),  'The  sixteenfold  Stoma,  vigour,  wealth  !' 
The  Trish/ubh  consists  of  eleven  syllables,  and — the 
air  being  of  Trish/ubh  nature — there  are  (in  the  air) 
four  quarters.  The  thunderbolt  is  fifteenfold,  and 
yonder  sun  is  the  sixteenfold  wielder  of  that  thunder- 
bolt :  with  that  thunderbolt,  with  that  Trish/ubh, 
he  (Pra.;,'apati)  drove  away  evil  in  the  south  ;  and  in 
like  manner  does  the  Sacrificer,  with  that  thunder- 
bolt, with  that  Trish/ubh,  now  drive  away  evil  in 
the  south. 

11.  Then  on  the  left  (north)  side,  with,  '  The 
forty-four-fold  Stoma,  lustre,  wealth!'  The 
Trish/ul)h  consists  of  forty-four  syllables,  and  the 
thunderbolt  is  of  Trish/ubh  nature  :  with  that  forty- 
four-fold  thunderbolt,  with  that  Trish/ubh,  he  (Pra^a- 
pati)  drove  away  evil  in  the  north ;  and  in  like 
manner  does  the  Sacrificer,  with  that  thunderbolt, 
with  that  Trish/ubh,  now  drive  away  evil  in  the  north. 

12.  Then  in  the  middle  (the  fifth),  with,  'Agni's 
soil-cover  thou  art!'^ — the  fourth  layer  indeed 
is  the  Brahman,  and  the  Brahman  is  Agni,  and  this, 
the  fifth  layer  is,  as  it  were,  the  (soil-)cover  of  that 
(fourth  layer); — 'his  sap,  in  truth:  may  the  All- 
gods  sing  thy  praises!  Seat  thee  here,  laden 
with  Stomas,  and  rich  in  fat!     Gain  for  us,  by 


86  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

sacrifice,  wealth  with  offspring!'  as  the  text  so 
the  sense. 

13.  This  one  he  lays  down  with  its  line-marks 
running  eastward  and  crosswise  ^ ;  for  by  that  one 
Pra/apati  then  cut  out  the  root  of  evil,  and  in  like 
manner  does  this  (Sacrificer)  now  thereby  cut  out  the 
root  of  evil.  On  the  right  (south)  side  (from  the 
centre  he  places  it),  for  the  thunderbolt  has  a  string  -^ 
on  the  right  side  ; — inside  the  one  in  the  southern 
quarter,  for  it  is  for  the  sake  of  extension  that  he 
leaves  that  space. 

14.  The  one  which  (lies)  in  front  is  the  out- 
breathing,  the  one  at  the  back  the  off-breathing : 
by  the  out-breathing  he  (Pra^apati)  then  drove  away 
evil  in  front,  and  by  the  off-breathing  in  the  rear ; 
and  in  like  manner  does  the  Sacrificer  now  by  the 
out-breathing  drive  away  evil  in  front,  and  by  the 
off-breathing  in  the  rear. 

15.  And  the  two  on  both  sides  (of  the  spine)  are 
the  two  arms  :  whatever  evil  there  was  sideways  of 
him,  that  he  drove  away  with  his  arms  ;  and  in  like 
manner  does  this  Sacrificer  now  drive  away  with  his 
arms  whatever  evil  there  is  sideways  of  him. 

^  That  is  to  say,  crosswise,  or  marked  in  the  opposite  direction 
to  the  Asapatna  brick  near  it,  viz.  to  the  one  placed  east  of  the 
southern  end  of  the  cross-spine  which  (like  all  bricks  placed  be- 
tween shoulder  and  thigh)  has  its  line-marks  running  from  south  to 
north.  The  fifth  Asapatna,  lying  immediately  north  of  that  southern 
one,  thus  has  its  line-marks  parallel,  not  (as  one  would  expect)  to 
the  cross-spine,  but  to  the  further  removed  spine. 

^  This  is  a  doubtful  rendering  of  '  udyama,'  which  is  accepted  by 
the  St.  Petersb.  Diet,  for  '  sha(/-udyama,''at  VI,  7,  i,  16,  18  ;  whilst 
in  the  present  case  '  dakshiwata-udyama '  seems  to  be  taken  by  it  to 
mean  '  southward  erected,  southward  drawn  (aufgespannt).'  Ud- 
yama, in  the  sense  '  extension,'  might  mean  a  protruding  part, 
serving  as  a  handle. 


VIII    KANDA,    5    ADHYAYA,    2    BRAHMAiVA,    2.         87 

16.  The  soil-bedded  one^  means  food:  whatever 
evil  there  was  above  him,  that  he  (Pra^apati)  drove 
away  by  means  of  food ;  and  in  like  manner  does 
the  Sacrificer  now,  by  means  of  food,  drive  away 
whatever  evil  there  is  above  him. 

17.  And,  verily,  whenever  he,  knowing  this, 
breathes  out,  he  thereby  drives  away  the  evil  which 
is  in  front  of  him  ;  and  when  he  breathes  backward, 
he  thereby  (drives  away)  that  which  is  in  the  rear ; 
and  when  he  does  work  with  his  arms,  he  thereby 
(drives  away)  that  which  is  sideways  of  him  ;  and 
when  he  eats  food,  he  thereby  (drives  away)  that 
(evil)  which  is  above  him  :  at  all  times,  indeed,  even 
while  sleeping,  does  he  who  knows  this  drive  away 
evil.  Hence,  one  must  not  speak  ill  of  him  who 
knows  this,  lest  one  should  be  his  evil  (enemy). 

Second  BRAHMAiVA. 

1.  He  then  lays  down  those  A'/zandasy as-  (relating 
to  the  metres).  For  Pra^apati,  having  freed  himself 
from  evil,  death,  asked  for  food  ;  hence,  to  this  day, 
a  sick  man,  when  he  gets  better,  asks  for  food ; 
and  people  have  hope  for  him,  thinking,  '  He  asks 
for  food,  he  will  live.'  The  gods  gave  him  that  food, 
these  (bricks)  relating  to  the  metres  ;  for  the  metres 
are  cattle,  and  cattle  are  food.  They  (the  metres) 
pleased  him,  and  inasmuch  as  they  pleased  (Z'/^and) 
him  they  are  (called)  metres  (/C7/andas). 

2.  He  lays  them  down  by  tens, — the  Viraj,'' 
consists    of  ten    syllables,  and   all    food    is  'vira^^' 

^  That  is,  the  fifth  Asapatna,  which  has  a  bed  or  layer  of  loose 
soil  (purisha)  spread  under  it. 

*  The  ^//andasya  or  Vira^  bricks  are  laid  down  at  the  end  of 
the  spines,  ten  in  each  quarter. 


88  S-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAA^A. 

(shining,  or  ruling) :  he  thus  bestows  all  food  on  him. 
On  all  (four)  sides  he  places  them  :  from  all  sides  he 
thus  bestows  food  on  him. 

3.  [He  lays  them  down,  with,  Va^.  S.  XV,  4.  5], 
'The  Course  metre,' — the  'course'  metre,  doubt- 
less, is  this  (terrestrial)  world;  —  'the  Expanse 
metre,' — the  'expanse'  metre,  doubtless,  is  the  air; 
'  the  Blissful  metre,' — the  '  blissful '  metre,  doubt- 
less, is  the  sky; — 'the  Encircler  metre,' — the 
'  encircler '  metre,  doubtless,  is  the  regions; — 'the 
Vestment  metre,' — the  'vestment'  metre,  doubt- 
less, is  food; — 'the  Mind  metre,' — the  'mind' 
metre,  doubtless,  is  Pra^apati ;  'theExtent  metre,' 
— the  '  extent '  metre,  doubtless,  is  yonder  sun. 

4.  'The  Stream^  metre,' — the  'stream'  metre, 
doubtless,  is  the  breath; — 'the  Sea  metre,' — the 
'sea'  metre,  doubtless,  is  the  mind; — 'the  Flood 
metre,'- — the  'flood'  metre,  doubtless,  is  speech; — 
'the  Kakubh  (peak)  metre,' — the  'Kakubh' metre, 
doubtless, is  the  out(andin)-breathing; — 'the  Three- 
peaked  metre,' — the  'three-peaked'  metre,  doubt- 
less, is  the  up-breathing  ;^ — 'the  Wisdom  metre,' — 
the  '  wisdom '  metre,  doubtless,  is  the  threefold 
science; — 'the  Arikupa  metre,' — the  '  Arikupa  ^ ' 
metre,  doubtless,  is  the  water; — 'the  Akshara- 
pankti  metre,' — the  Aksharapaiikti  (row  of  sylla- 
bles) metre,  doubtless,  is  yonder  (heavenly)  world  ; — 
'the  Padapahkti  metre,' — the  Padaparikti  (row  of 
words  or  steps)  metre,  doubtless,  is  this  (terrestrial) 
world; — '  the  Vishz'arapankti  metre,' — the  Vish- 
/araparikti  (row  of  expansion)  metre,  doubtless,  is  the 
regions; — 'the  Bright  Razor  metre,' — the  'bright 

'  A  word  of  doubtful  meaning  (?  drinking  its  own  windings). 


VIII    KANDA,    5    ADHYAVA,     2     BRAHMAiVA,    6.         89 


razor'  metre,  doubtless,  is  yonder  sun  ; — 'the  Vest- 
ment metre,  the  Investment  metre,' — the  'vest- 
ment '  metre,  doubtless,  is  food,  and  the  '  investment ' 
metre  is  food. 

5.  'The  Uniting  metre,'— the 'uniting'  metre, 
doubtless,  is  the  night; — 'the  Separating  metre,' 
— the  '  separating '  metre,  doubtless,  is  the  day  ; — 
'the  Br/hat  metre,' — the  '  br?  hat '  (great)  metre, 
doubtless,  is  yonder  world  ;  —  'the  Rathantara 
metre,' — the  'rathantara'  metre,  doubtless,  is  this 
world; — 'the  Troop  metre,' — the  ' troop '  metre, 
doubtless,  is  the  wind  ;—' the  Yoke  metre,' — the 
'  yoke'  metre,  doubtless,  is  the  air;—'  the  Devourer 
metre,' — the  'devourer  '  metre,  doubtless,  is  food  ; — 
'  the  Bright  metre,' — the  '  bright '  metre,  doubtless, 
is  the  fire; — 'the  Sa;;^stubh  metre,  the  Anush- 
/ubh  metre,' — the  '  sa?;2stubh  '  metre,  doubtless,  is 
speech,  and  the  '  anush/ubh  '  metre  is  speech  ; — 
'the  Course  metre,  the  Expanse  metre,'— the 
meaning  of  this  has  been  explained. 

6.  '  The  Strength  metre,' — the  'strength  '  metre, 
doubtless,  is  food  ; — '  the  Strength-maker  metre,' 
the  'strength-maker'  metre,  doubtless,  is  Agni  (the 
fire); — 'the  Striver  metre,' — the'striver'  metre, 
doubtless,  is  yonder  world  ; — '  the  Ample  metre,' — 
the  'ample'  metre,  doubtless,  is  this  world; — 'the 
Cover  metre,' — the  '  cover  '  metre,  doubtless,  is  the 
air; — 'the  Unclimbable  metre,' — the  'unclimbable' 
metre,  doubtless,  is  yonder  sun  ; — ■'  the  Slow  metre,' 
— the  'slow'  metre,  doubtless,  is  the  Parikti  ; — '  the 
Ankaiika  metre,' — the  '  aiikaiika  ^ '  metre,  doubt- 
less, is  water. 


Another  word  of  doubtful  meaning  (?  winding-winding). 


90  5'ATAPATIIA-BRAHMAA^A. 

7.  Now  of  those  which  he  lays  down  in  front, 
the  first  is  the  out  (and  in)-breathing,  the  second  the 
through-breathing,  the  third  the  up-breathing,  the 
fourth  the  up-breathing,  the  fifth  the  through-breath- 
ing, the  sixth  the  out-breathing,  the  seventh  the  out- 
breathing,  the  eighth  the  through-breathing,  the  ninth 
the  up-breathing,  and  the  tenth,  in  this  case,  is  the 
Sacrificer  himself :  this  same  Sacrificer,  being  raised 
and  firmly  established  on  this  Vira^  (brick),  made 
up  of  breath,  lays  down  (bricks)  extending  both 
backward  and  forward,  for  the  breathings  move 
both  backward  and  forward. 

8.  And  of  those  on  the  right  (south)  side,  the 
first  is  Agni  (fire),  the  second  Vayu  (the  wind),  the 
third  Aditya  (the  sun),  the  fourth  Aditya,  the  fifth 
Vayu,  the  sixth  Agni,  the  seventh  Agni,  the  eighth 
Vayu,  the  ninth  Aditya,  and  the  tenth,  in  this  case, 
is  the  Sacrificer  himself:  this  same  Sacrificer,  being 
raised  and  firmly  established  on  this  Vira^,  made  up 
of  deities,  puts  on  (bricks)  extending  both  hitherwards 
and  thitherwards,  for  those  gods  move  both  hither- 
wards  and  thitherwards. 

9.  And  of  those  behind,  the  first  is  this  (terrestrial) 
world,  the  second  the  air,  the  third  the  sky,  the 
fourth  the  sky,  the  fifth  the  air,  the  sixth  this  world, 
the  seventh  this  world,  the  eighth  the  air,  the  ninth 
the  sky,  and  the  tenth,  in  this  case,  is  the  Sacrificer 
himself:  this  same  Sacrificer,  being  raised  and  firmly 
established  on  that  Vira^,  made  up  of  the  worlds, 
lays  down  (bricks)  extending  both  hitherwards  and 
thitherwards  ; — whence  these  worlds  extend  both 
hitherwards  and  thitherwards. 

10.  And  of  those  on  the  left  (north)  side,  the  first 
is  the   summer,  the  second  the  rainy  season,    the 


VIII    KANDA,    5    ADHYAYA,    2    BRAHMAiVA,    1 6.        9 1 


third  the  winter,  the  fourth  the  winter,  the  fifth  the 
rainy  season,  the  sixth  the  summer,  the  seventh 
the  summer,  the  eighth  the  rainy  season,  the 
ninth  the  winter,  and  the  tenth,  in  this  case,  is  the 
Sacrificer  himself:  this  same  Sacrificer,  being  raised 
and  firmly  established  on  that  Vira^,  made  up  of  the 
seasons,  lays  down  (bricks)  extending  both  hither- 
wards  and  thitherwards; — whence  those  seasons 
move  both  hitherwards  and  thitherwards  \ 

1 1.  And,  again,  those  which  he  lays  down  in  front 
are  the  vital  airs.  There  are  ten  of  them,  for  there 
are  ten  vital  airs.  He  places  them  in  the  front  part, 
for  these  vital  airs  are  in  the  front  part. 

12.  And  those  on  the  right  (south)  side  are  the 
deities,~Agni,  the  Earth,  Vayu,  the  Air,  Aditya, 
the  Sky,  A'andra  (the  moon),  the  Stars,  Food,  and 
Water. 

13.  And  those  behind  are  the  regions  (quarters), — 
four  regions,  four  intermediate  regions,  the  upper 
region,  and  this  (earth). 

14.  And  those  on  the  left  (north)  side  are  the 
months, — two  spring-months,  two  summer-months, 
two  months  of  the  rainy  season,  two  autumn-months, 
and  two  winter-months. 

15.  And,  again,  the  first  ten  are  this  (terrestrial) 
world,  the  second  the  air,  the  third  the  sky.  By  the 
first  set  of  ten  they  (the  gods)  ascended  this  (earth), 
by  the  second  the  air,  by  the  third  the  sky ;  and  in 
like  manner  does  the  Sacrificer  now,  by  the  first  set 
of  ten,  ascend  this  (earth),  by  the  second  the  air,  and 
by  the  third  the  sky. 

16.  This,  then,  is,  as  it  were,  an  ascent  away  from 


^  That  is  to  say,  they  come  and  go. 


92  S-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

here ;  but  this  (earth)  is  the  foundation  :  the  gods 
came  back  to  this  (earth),  the  foundation  ;  and  in  hke 
manner  does  the  Sacrificer  now  come  back  to  this 
(earth),  the  foundation.  And  that  last  set  of  ten  is 
this  world  :  hence,  even  as  (takes  place)  that  start 
from  the  first  set  of  ten,  so  from  the  last ;  for  this  is 
the  same, — those  two  sets  of  ten  (the  first  and  last) 
are  this  (terrestrial)  world. 

17.  Now  these  are  forty  bricks  and  forty  formu- 
las,— that  makes  eighty,  and  eighty  (a^iti)  means 
food^:  thus  whatever  he  now  says  that  he  makes 
to  be  food,  a^iti,  and  gives  it  him,  and  thereby 
gratifies  him  (Agni). 

Third  BRAHMAivA. 

1.  He  then  lays  down  the  Stomabhaga  (praise- 
sharing  bricks).  For  at  that  time  Indra  set  his 
mind  upon  that  food  of  Pra^'apati,  and  tried  to  go 
from  him.  He  spake,  'Why  dost  thou  go  from  me  ? 
why  dost  thou  leave  me?' — 'Give  me  the  essence 
of  that  food  :  enter  me  therewith  ! ' — '  So  be  it ! '  so 
he  gave  him  the  essence  of  that  food,  and  entered 
him  therewith. 

2.  Now  he  who  was  that  Pra^'apati  is  this  very 
Agni  (the  fire-altar)  that  is  now  being  built  up ;  and 
that  food  is  these  AV/andasya  (bricks) ;  and  that 
essence  of  food  is  these  Stomabhagas  ;  and  he  who 
was  Indra  is  yonder  Aditya  (the  sun)  :  he  indeed  is 
the  Stoma  (hymn  of  praise),  for  whatsoever  praises 
they  sing,  it  is  him  they  praise  thereby, — it  is  to 
that  same  Stoma  he  gave  a  share  ;  and  inasmuch  as 

^  The  author  apparently  connects  '  asit'i '  with  the  root '  as,'  to  eat. 


VIII    KANDA,    5    ADHYAYA,    3    BRAHMAiVA,    5.         93 


he  gave  a  share  (bhaga)  to  that  Stoma,  these  are 
(called)  Stomabhagas. 

3.  [He  lays  them  down,  with,  Va^.  S.  XV,  6.  7], 
'  By  the  ray  quicken  thou  the  truth  for  truth  ! ' 
— the  ray,  doubtless,  is  that  (sun),  and  ray  is  food  ; 
having  put  together  that  (sun)  and  the  essence 
thereof,  he  makes  it  enter  his  own  self; — 'by  the 
starting,  by  the  law,  quicken  the  law!' — the 
starting,  doubtless,  is  that  (sun),  and  the  starting  also 
means  food  :  having  put  together  that  (sun)  and 
the  essence  thereof,  he  makes  it  enter  his  own  self; 
— 'by  the  going  after,  by  the  sky,  quicken  the 
sky! ' — the  going  after,  doubtless,  is  that  (sun),  and 
the  going  after  also  means  food  ;  having  put  together 
that  (sun)  and  the  essence  thereof,  he  makes  it  enter 
his  own  self.  Thus  whatever  he  mentions  here, 
that  and  the  essence  thereof  he  puts  together  and 
makes  it  enter  his  own  self:  'By  such  and  such 
quicken  thou  such  and  such  ! ' — '  Such  and  such 
thou  art:  for  such  and  such  (I  deposit)  thee!' — 
'By  the  lord,  by  strength,  quicken  strength!' 
thus  they  (the  bricks)  are  divided  into  three  kinds, 
for  food  is  of  three  kinds. 

4.  And  as  to  why  he  lays  down  the  Stomabhagas. 
Now  the  gods,  having  laid  down  the  far-shining 
layer,  mounted  it.  They  spake,  '  Meditate  ye  !  ' 
whereby,  doubtless,  they  meant  to  say,  '  Seek  )'e 
a  layer ! '  Whilst  meditating,  they  saw  even  the 
firmament,  the  heavenly  world,  and  laid  it  down. 
Now  that  same  firmament,  the  heavenly  world,  in- 
deed is  the  same  as  these  Stomabhagas,  and  thus 
in  laying  down  these,  he  lays  down  the  firmament, 
the  heavenly  world. 

5.  The    first  three   (bricks)   are   this    (terrestrial) 


94  ^-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

world,  the  second  (three)  the  air,  and  the  third 
(three)  the  sky,  the  fourth  the  eastern,  the  fifth  the 
southern,  the  sixth  the  western,  and  the  seventh  the 
northern  regions. 

6.  These  twenty-one  bricks,  then,  are  these 
worlds  and  the  resfions,  and  these  worlds  and  the 
regions  are  a  foundation,  and  these  worlds  and 
the  regions  are  twenty-one  :  whence  they  say,  *  the 
'Ekav'imsa.  (twenty-one-fold)  is  a  foundation.' 

7.  And  the  eight  bricks  which  remain  over  are 
the  Gayatri  consisting  of  eight  syllables ;  but  the 
Gayatri  is  the  Brahman,  and  as  to  that  Brahman, 
it  is  yonder  burning  disk :  it  burns,  while  firmly- 
established  on  that  twenty-one-fold  one,  as  on 
a  foundation,  whence  it  does  not  fall  down. 

8.  Now  some  lay  down  a  thirtieth  (Stomabhaga), 
with,  'Beautifully  arrayed,  quicken  thou  the 
kshatra  for  the  kshatra!'  saying,  'Of  thirty 
syllables  is  the  Vira^  (metre)  and  this  layer  is 
vira^  (far-shining).'  But  let  him  not  do  so  :  they 
(who  do  so)  exceed  (this  layer  so  as  not  to 
be)  amounting  to  the  twenty-one-fold,  and  to  the 
Gayatri ;  and  that  undiminished  Vira^,  doubtless,  is 
the  world  of  Indra:  in  the  world  of  Indra  they  raise 
a  spiteful  enemy  of  equal  power  (to  Indra),  and 
thrust  Indra  out  of  the  world  of  Indra.  And  at  his 
own  sacrifice  the  Sacrificer  assuredly  is  Indra:  in 
the  Sacrificer's  realm  they  raise  for  the  Sacrificer 
a  spiteful  enemy  of  equal  power,  and  thrust  the 
Sacrificer  out  of  the  Sacrificer's  own  realm.  But, 
surely,  that  fire  which  they  bring  hither  is  no  other 
than  this  Sacrificer:  by  means  of  his  foundation  it 
is  he  who  is  the  thirtieth  (brick)  in  this  (layer). 


VIII    KANDA,    5    ADHYAYA,    4    BRAHMAiVA,   5.        95 

Fourth  BRAHMAiVA. 

1.  He  lays  them  down  on  the  range  of  the 
Ash3.d/i3. ;  for  the  Asha^'/^a  is  speech,  and  this  (set 
of  bricks  ^)  is  the  essence  (of  food) :  he  thus  lays  into 
speech  the  essence  of  food  ;  whence  it  is  through 
(the  channel  of)  speech  that  one  distinguishes  the 
essence  of  food  for  all  the  limbs. 

2.  And,  again,  as  to  why  (on  the  range)  of  the 
Ashart'/^a; — the  Ashart'/^a,  doubtless,  is  this  (earth), 
and  the  Stomabhagas  are  yonder  sun :  he  thus 
establislies  yonder  sun  upon  this  earth  as  a  firm 
foundation. 

3.  And,  again,  why  (on  that)  of  the  Asha^/^a ; — 
the  Asha^//a,  doubtless,  is  this  (earth),  and  the 
Stomabhagas  are  the  heart :  he  thus  lays  into  this 
(earth)  the  heart,  the  mind  :  whence  on  this  (earth) 
one  thinks  with  the  heart,  with  the  mind.  He  lays 
them  down  on  every  side  :  he  thus  places  the  heart, 
the  mind  everywhere  ;  whence  everywhere  on  this 
(earth)  one  thinks  with  the  heart,  with  the  mind. 
And,  moreover,  these  (bricks)  are  lucky  signs  :  he 
places  them  on  all  sides ;  whence  they  say  of 
him  who  has  a  (lucky)  sign  (lakshman)  on  every 
(or  any)  side  that  he  has  good  luck  (pu;^yalak- 
shmika). 

4.  He  then  covers  them  with  loose  soil ;  for 
loose  soil  (purisha)  means  food,  and  this  (set  of 
bricks)  is  the  essence  (of  food)  :  he  thus  makes  it 
invisible,  for  invisible,  as  it  were,  is  the  essence 
of  food. 

5.  And,  again,  as  to  why  (he  covers  it)  with  loose 

^  Or,  this  fire-altar. 


g6  5'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAA^A. 

soil ; — loose  soil,  doubtless,  means  food,  and  this  (set 
of  bricks)  is  the  essence  :  he  thus  joins  and  unites 
the  food  and  its  essence. 

6.  And,  again,  as  to  why  with  loose  soil  ; — the 
Stomabhagas  are  the  heart,  and  the  loose  soil  is  the 
pericardium  :  he  thus  encloses  the  heart  in  the  peri- 
cardium. 

7.  And,  again,  as  to  why  with  loose  soil; — this 
fire-altar  is  the  year,  and  by  means  of  the  soil- 
coverings  of  the  layers  he  divides  it :  those  first 
four  layers  are  four  seasons.  And  having  laid  down 
the  Stomabhagas,  he  throws  loose  soil  thereon  : 
that  is  the  fifth  layer,  that  is  the  fifth  season. 

8.  Here  now  they  say,  '  Since  the  other  layers 
conclude  with  Lokamp;V/^as  (space-filling  bricks), 
and  no  space-filler  is  laid  down  in  this  (layer)  :  what, 
then,  is  the  space-filler  therein  ? '  The  space-filler, 
surely,  is  yonder  sun,  and  this  layer  is  he  ;  and  this 
is  of  itself^  a  space-filling  layer.  And  what  there  is 
above  this  (layer)  up  to  the  covering  of  soil  that 
is  the  sixth  layer,  that  is  the  sixth  season. 

9.  He  then  throws  down  the  loose  soil.  Thereon 
he  lays  down  the  Vikar/^i  and  the  naturally-perforated 
(brick) ;  he  bestrews  them  with  chips  of  gold,  and 
places  the  fire  thereon  :  that  is  the  seventh  layer, 
that  is  the  seventh  season. 

10.  But,  indeed,  there  are  only  six  of  them  ;  for 
as  to  the  Vikar;^i  and  the  Svayam-atr//^;^a,  they 
belong  to  the  sixth  layer. 

11.  And,  indeed,  there  are  only  five  of  them, — on 
the  other  (layers)  he  throws  down  the  loose  soil  with 
a   prayer,  and   here   (he   does   so)  silently :    in   that 

^  Or,  and  he  (the  sun)  himself. 


VIII    KANDA,    6    ADHYAYA,     I     BRAHMAiVA,    2.        97 


respect  this  is  not  a  layer.  And  the  other  layers 
end  with  space-fillers,  but  here  he  lays  down  no 
space-filler :   in  that  respect  also  this  is  not  a  layer. 

12.  And,  indeed,  there  are  only  three  of  them, — 
the  first  layer  is  this  very  (terrestrial)  world  ;  and 
the  uppermost  (layer)  is  the  sky ;  and  those  three 
(intermediate  layers)  are  the  air,  for  there  is,  as  it 
were,  only  one  air  here :  thus  (there  are)  three,  or 
five,  or  six,  or  seven  of  them. 

Sixth  Adhyaya.     First  Brahmajva. 

1.  He  lays  down  the  Nakasads  (firmament-seated 
bricks) :  the  firmament-seated  ones,  assuredly,  are  the 
gods.  In  this  (layer)  that  whole  fire-altar  becomes 
completed,  and  therein  these  (bricks  are)  the  firma- 
ment (naka),  the  world  of  heaven  :  it  is  therein  that 
the  gods  seated  themselves ;  and  inasmuch  as  the 
gods  seated  themselves  on  that  firmament,  in  the 
world  of  heaven,  the  gods  are  the  firmament-seated. 
And  in  like  manner  does  the  Sacrificer,  when  he  lays 
down  these  (bricks),  now  seat  himself  on  that  firma- 
ment, in  the  world  of  heaven. 

2.  And,  again,  why  he  lays  down  the  Nakasads. 
Now  at  that  time  the  gods  saw  that  firmament,  the 
world  of  heaven,  these  Stomabhagas  \     They  spake, 

^  The  central  portion  of  the  fifth  layer  is  here  characterised  as 
symbolically  rejiresenting  the  firmament,  the  blue  canopy  of  heaven, 
and  the  region  of  bliss  beyond  it.  The  outer  rim  of  this  central 
structure  is  formed  by  a  continuous  ring  of  twenty-nine  Stoma- 
bhaga  (st)  bricks  representing,  it  would  seem,  the  horizon  on 
which  the  vault  of  heaven  rests.  There  is  some  doubt  as  to  the  exact 
manner  in  which  this  ring  of  bricks  is  to  be  arranged.  According 
to  Katy.  .S'rautas.  XVII,  11,  10,  fifteen  bricks  are  to  be  placed  south 
(and  fourteen  north)  of  the  anuka,  or  spine  (running  through  the 

[43]  H 


98 


■SATAPATHA-BRAHMATVA. 


'  Think  ye  upon  this,  how  we  may  seat  ourselves  on 
that  firmament,  in  the  world  of  heaven  !'  They  spake, 

centre  from  west  to  east).  As  regards  the  southern  semicircle, 
the  fifteen  bricks  are  to  be  distributed  in  such  a  way  that  eight 
fall  within  the  south-easterly,  and  seven  into  the  south-westerly, 
quadrant.  Some  such  arrangement  as  that  adopted  in  the  diagram 
below  would  seem  to  be  what  is  intended.  It  will  be  seen  that 
this  arrangement  includes  two  half-size  bricks  in  the  south-easterly 

THE   CENTRAL   PART   OF   THE    FIFTH   LAYER.   - 

N 


quadrant,  the  one  lying  immediately  south  of  the  '  spine,'  and  the 
other  immediately  east  of  the  '  cross-spine.'  It  is  an  awkward  fact, 
however,  that  one  of  the  commentators  on  the  Siitra  referred  to, 
states  that  there  are  to  be  two  half-foot  bricks,  (one)  on  each  side 
of  the  spine — that  is,  as  would  seem,  the  '  cross-spine.'  I  cannot 
but  think,  however,  that  this  must  be  a  mistake,  as  otherwise  it 
would  seem  to  make  the  construction  of  a  continuous  ring  impos- 
sible.    Inside  this  ring,  on  the  adjoining  range  (viz.  the  i?;'tavya 


VIII    KANDA,    6    ADIIYAVA,     I     BRAlIMAiVA,    3.        99 


'Meditate  ye!  seek  ye  a  layer!'  whereby,  indeed, 
they  said,  '  Seek  ye  this,  how  we  may  seat  ourselves 
on  this  firmament,  in  the  world  of  heaven  ! ' 

3.  Whilst  meditating,  they  saw  these  bricks,  the 
Nakasads,  and  placed  them  on  (the  altar)  :  by  means 
of  them  they  seated  themselves  on  that  firmament, 
in  the  world  of  heaven  ;  and  inasmuch  as  through 
them  they  seated  themselves  (sad)  on  that  firmament 
(naka),  in  the  world  of  heaven,  these  are  the  Naka- 
sad  (bricks)  ;  and  in  like  manner  does  the  Sacrificer, 
when  he  lays  down  these  (bricks),  now  seat  himself 
on  that  firmament,  in  the  world  of  heaven. 


range,  being  the  fifth  range  from  the  centre,  see  the  diagram  of  the 
first  layer,  p.  17),  five  Nakasads  (n)  are  placed  on  the  spines, 
with  the  exception  of  the  eastern  one,  which  is  to  be  placed  in  the 
second  space  north  of  the  spine,  that  is  to  say,  a  foot  from  it  (so 
as  to  leave  space  between  it  and  the  spine  for  the  left  7?/tavya; 
cf.  VIII,  7,  I,  II,  with  note).  In  the  south  two  half-sized  bricks  are 
laid  down  instead  of  one  full-sized  one.  All  these  five  bricks  are  of 
half  the  usual  thickness  so  as  to  allow  five  others,  the  PaT/X-a/Jua'as 
(p),  being  placed  upon  them.  Of  the  /Viandasyas,  or  bricks 
representing  the  metres,  only  three  sets  (of  three  bricks  each,  viz, 
a  full-sized  one  flanked  on  either  side  by  a  half-sized  one)  fall  within 
the  circle  formed  by  the  stomabhaga-ring,  viz.  the  trish/ubhs  (t), 
^agatis  (g),  and  anush/ubhs  (a).  The  remaining  space  in  the 
centre  is  now  filled  up  by  the  Garhapatya  hearth,  consisting  of 
eight  bricks.  Thereon  is  placed  a  second  layer  of  eight  bricks 
exactly  corresponding  to  the  first,  and  called  Punaj-zC'iti.  This 
pile  (marked  by  hatching  in  the  sketch)  thus  rises  above  the  fifth 
layer  by  the  full  depth  of  a  brick.  He  then  lays  down  the  two 
i?/tavyas  (m)  just  within  the  ring  on  the  east  side;  and  the 
Vijva^yotis  (v),  representing  the  sun,  immediately  west  of  them. 
Having  now  filled  up  the  available  spaces  of  the  layer  with 
Lokamp/-/;/as,  and  scattered  loose  soil  on  it,  he  finally  lays  down 
two  perforated  bricks  (marked  in  the  sketch  by  cross-hatching),  the 
Vikarwi  and  the  Svayamat/-/;/;/a,  so  that  the  latter  lies  exactly 
in  the  centre,  and  the  former  immediately  north  of  it,  over  the 
'  cross-spine.' 

H   2 


lOO  5'ATAPATHA-BRAH^•AiVA. 

4.  He  places  them  in  the  (four)  quarters;  for  that 
firmament,  the  world  of  heaven,  is  the  quarters :  he 
thus  establishes  them  in  the  world  of  heaven.  On 
the  range  of  the  i'^/tav)  as  (he  places  them) ;  for  the 
i?/tavyas  (seasonal  bricks)  are  the  year,  and  the  world 
of  heaven  is  the  year :  it  is  in  the  world  of  heaven 
he  thus  establishes  them.  Within  the  Stomabhagas 
(he  places  them);  for  this  is  the  firmament,  the  world 
of  heaven  :  it  is  therein  he  thus  establishes  them. 

5.  In  front  he  lays  down  one,  with  (Va^.  S.  XV, 
10),  'Queen  thou  art,  the  Eastern  region,'  for 
a  queen  indeed  the  eastern  region  is; — 'The  divine 
Vasus  are  thine  overlords  ','  for  the  divine  Vasus 
are  indeed  ihe  overlords  of  that  region; — 'Agni  is 
the  repeller  of  shafts,'  for  Agni,  indeed,  is  here 
the  repeller  of  shafts  ; — '  The  Trivr/t-Stoma  may 
uphold  thee  on  earth!'  for  by  the  threefold 
hymn(-form)  this  one  is  indeed  upheld  on  earth  ; — 
'The  A^ya-5astra  may  support  thee  for  steadi- 

A 

ness  sake^!'  for  by  the  A^^ya-i-astra  it  is  indeed 
supported  on  earth  for  steadiness'  sake; — 'the 
Rathantara-saman  for  stability  in  the  air!' for 
by  the  Rathantara-saman  it  is  indeed  established  in 
the  air  ; — '  May  the  T^zshis,  the  first-born,  mag- 
nify^ thee  among  the  gods!' — the  -/^/shis,  the 
first-born,  doubtless,  are  the  vital  airs  ^,  for  they  are 
the  first-born  Brahman^; — 'with  the  measure,  the 
width  of  the  sky!' — that  is,  'as  great  as  the  sky 
is,  so   much    in  width   may  they  broaden   thee  ! ' — 

^  Or,  perhaps,  'the  Vasus  are  thy  divine  overlords;'  but  see 
paragraph  9. 

-  Lit.  for  unwaveringness  (so  as  not  to  totler). 

'  Lit.  broaden,  widen. 

*  See  VI,  1,1,1;   VII,  2,  3,  5.  '  See  VI,  i,  i,  8. 


VIII    KA.VDA,    6    ADHYAYA,    I    liRAHMA^VA,   7.        lOI 


'And  he,  the  upholder,  and  the  overlord,' — 
these  two  are  speech  and  mind,  for  these  two  uphold 
everything  here; — 'may  they  all,  of  one  mind, 
settle  thee,  and  the  Sacrificer,  on  the  back  of 
the  firmament,  in  the  world  of  heaven!'  as  the 
text,  so  its  import. 

6.  Then  on  the  right  (south)  side  (he  lays  down 
one^),  with  (Vaf.  S.  XV,  ii),  'Wide-ruling  thou 
art,  the  southern  region,'  for  wide-ruling  indeed 
is  that  southern  region; — 'The  divine  Rudras  are 
thine  overlords,'  for  the  divine  Rudras  are  indeed 
the  overlords  of  that  region; — 'Indra  istherepeller 
of  shafts,'  for  Indra,  indeed,  is  here  the  repeller  of 
shafts; — 'The  Pa;7/C'ada5a-stoma  may  uphold 
thee  on  earth!'  for  by  the  fifteenfold  hymn  it  is 
indeed  upheld  on  earth; — 'The  Pratiga-^astra 
may  support  thee  for  steadiness'  sake!'  for  by 
the  Praiiga-^astra  it  is  indeed  supported  on  earth  for 
steadiness' sake; — 'the  Br/hat-saman  for  stability 
in  the  air!'  for  by  the  Br/hat-saman  it  is  indeed 
established  in  the  air; — 'May  the  Ri'shis,  the 
first-born,  magnify  thee  among  gods  .  .  .!'  the 
import  of  this  (and  the  rest)  has  been  explained. 

7.  Then  behind  (he  lays  down  one),  with  (Va^'-.  S. 
XV,  12),  'All-ruling  thou  art,  the  western 
region,'  for  all-ruling  indeed  is  that  western  region  ; 
— '  The  divine  Adityas  are  thine  overlords,'  for 
the  divine  Adityas  are  indeed  the  overlords  of  that 
region; — '  Varu;/a  is  the  repeller  of  shafts,' for 
Varu/^a,  indeed,  is  here  the  repeller  of  shafts ; — 
'The    Saptada5a-stoma    may  uphold   thee    on 


1  Thai  is,  the  southern  of  the  two  half-sized  ones  to  be  placed  in 
this  quarter. 


I02  5'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA, 


earth!'  for  by  the  seventeenfold  hymn  it  is  indeed 
upheld  on  earth; — 'The  Marutvatiya-^astra  may 
support  thee  for  steadiness'  sake!'  for  by  the 
Marutvatiya-^astra  it  is  indeed  supported  on  earth 
for  steadiness  sake; — ^' the  Vairupa-saman  for 
stability  in  the  air!'  for  by  the  Vairupa-saman  it 
is  indeed  established  in  the  air  ; — '  May  the  Rish'is, 
the  first-born,  magnify  thee  among  the  gods 
.  .  . ! '  the  import  of  this  has  been  explained. 

8.  Then   on  the  left   (north)  side   (he  lays   down 
one),  with  (Vaf.  S.  XV,  1 3),  '  Self-ruling  thou  art, 
the  northern  region,'  for  self-ruling  that  northern 
region  indeed  is  ; — '  The  divine  Maruts  are  thine 
overlords,'  for  the  divine  Maruts  are  indeed   the 
overlords  of  that  region; — 'Soma  is  the  repeller 
of  shafts,'  for  Soma,  indeed,  is  here  the  repeller  of 
shafts; — 'The    Ekavim^a-stoma    may    uphold 
thee  on  earth!'  for  by  the  twenty-one -fold  hymn 
this  one  is  indeed  upheld  on  earth; — 'The  Nish- 
kevalya-^astra   may  support   thee   for  steadi- 
ness' sake!'  for  by  the   Nishkevalya-5-astra    it   is 
-  indeed  supported   on   earth   for  steadiness'  sake ; — 
'the  Vaira^a-saman   for  stability  in  the  air!' 
for  by  the  Vaira^a-saman  it  is  indeed  established  in 
the    air; — 'May    the    i?/shis,    the    first-born, 
magnify  thee  among  the  gods  .  .  .!'  the  import 
of  this  has  been  explained. 

9.  Then  in  the  middle  (he  lays  down  one  ^),  with 
(Va^.  S.  XV,  14),  '  The  sovereign  mistress  thou 
art,  the  Great  region!'  for  the  sovereign  mistress 
that   great  region   indeed  is; — 'the  All-gods  are 

^  That  is,  he  lays  down  a  half-sized  brick  immediately  north  of 
the  southern  one,  and  thus  in  the  direction  of  the  centre  from  that 
brick. 


VIII    KANDA,    6    ADHYAYA,    I    BRAHMAiVA,   II.       IO3 


thine  overlords,'  for  the  All-gods  are  indeed  the 
overlords  of  that  region; — '  Br/haspati  is  the  re- 
peller  of  shafts,'  for  Brzhaspati,  indeed,  is  here  the 
repeller  of  shafts; — 'The  Tri;^ava-  and  Trayas- 
tri^/^i'a-stomas  may  uphold  thee  on  earth;' — 
for  by  the  twenty-nine-fold  and  thirty-three-fold 
hymns  this  one  is  indeed  upheld  on  earth; — 'The 
Vai^vadeva-  and  Agnimaruta-^astras  may  sup- 
port thee  for  steadiness'  sake  !'  for  by  the  Vaii"- 
vadeva-  and  Agnimaruta-^astras  it  is  indeed  supported 
on  earth  for  steadiness'  sake; — 'May  the  7?/shis, 
the  first-born,  magnify  thee  among  the  gods 
.  .  . ! '  the  import  of  this  has  been  explained. 

10.  Thus  much,  indeed,  is  the  whole  sacrifice,  and 
the  sacrifice  is  the  self  of  the  gods  :  it  was  after 
making  the  sacrifice  their  own  self  that  the  gods 
seated  themselves  on  that  firmament,  in  the  world 
of  heaven ;  and  in  like  manner  does  the  Sacrificer 
now,  after  making  the  sacrifice  his  own  self,  seat 
himself  on  that  firmament,  in  the  world  of  heaven. 

11.  He  then  lays  down  the  Fa.u^a.^uda.  ('five- 
knobbed')  bricks;  for  the  Nakasads  are  (parts  of) 
the  sacrifice,  and  so  indeed  are  the  Pa/H-a/'u^as  the 
sacrifice :  the  Nakasads  are  these  four  sacrificial 
priests  together  with  the  Sacrificer  as  the  fifth  ;  and 
the  ?2Lu/cal'ud3.s  are  the  Hotras  \  Now  the  Hotras 
are  additional  (to  the  officiating  staff,  or  to  the 
Hotr/)  and  whatever  is  additional  is  an  excrescence 
(Z'u^/a) ;  and  hence,  as  they  are  five  additional  (bricks), 
they  are  (called)  Pa?'2/'a/'iu/as  ^. 

^  That  is,  the  offices  of  Hotrakas,  or  assistants  to  the  Hot/-/. 

'•=  These  bricks  would  seem  to  have  had  some  kind  of  protuber- 
ances or  bulgings  {/aida),  or  perhaps  tufts,  resembling  a  man's 
crest-lock  or  top-knot  (/u^/a).    Possibly,  however,  these  five  bricks, 


I04  A'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAJVA. 

12.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  lays  down  the 
Nakasad-Pa77/C'a/^LWas ; — it  is  for  the  sake  of  com- 
pleteness ;  for  the  Nakasads  are  the  self,  and  the 
VsiU^a/i-udsLS  the  mate,  and  this,  the  mate,  doubtless, 
is  one  half  of  the  self;  for  when  one  is  with  his 
mate\  then  he  is  whole  and  complete. 

13.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  lays  down  the 
Nakasad-Pa;7/'a/('urt^as ; — the  Nakasads  are  the  self, 
and  the  Fau^a.Hid3iS  are  offspring  (or  subjects)  ^. 
Now  progeny  is  something  additional  to  the  self, 
and  whatever  is  additional  is  an  excrescence ;  and 
hence,  as  they  are  five  additional  ones,  they  are 
(called)  Pa;7/'aX'u^as. 

14.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  lays  down  the 
Nakasad-Pa?7/('a/^u^as; — the  Nakasads  are  the  regions, 
and  the  Fd.fl/ka.kuda.s,  too,  are  the  regions  :  what  five 
regions  there  are  on  this  side  of  yonder  sun,  they  are 
the  Nakasads,  and  those  which  are  on  the  other  side 
are  the  Pa/^/'a/urt'as.  Now  those  regions  which  are 
on  the  other  side  of  yonder  sun  are  additional,  and 
what  is  additional  is  an  excrescence  (/'u^a) :  and 
hence,  as  they  are  five  additional  ones,  they  are 
called  Fau/(^al'udas. 

15.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  lays  down  the 
Vau/ka/i'uda.s.  Now,  at  that  time  the  gods  were 
afraid  lest  the  fiends,  the  Rakshas,  should  destroy 

being  placed  on  the  top  of  the  Nakasads,  are  themselves  here 
represented  as  something  additional.  Such,  at  any  rate,  seems  to 
be  the  definition  of  the  term  given  in  the  text  above  and  in  parag.  13. 
The  MS.  of  the  commentary  reads,  '  kayasya  vai  tat  pavar^ita/«  (!) 
sa  kudAh  ke^apuT/^a^.' 

'  This,  doubtless,  is  here  the  meaning  of  mithunam;  and 
similarly  in  I,  7,  2,  11,  we  ought  to  translate,  'The  vasha/kara  is 
the  mate  of  those  two  (anuvakya  and  ya^ya).' 

^  See  paragraph  21. 


VIII    KAiVDA,    6    ADIIYAYA,   I    BRAHMAJVA,   1 6,        IO5 

these  worlds  of  theirs  from  above.  They  put  those 
protectors  over  these  worlds,  to  wit,  those  shafts 
and  missiles;  and  in  like  manner  does  the  Sacrificer 
now  put  those  protectors  over  these  worlds,  to  wit, 
those  shafts  and  missiles. 

16.  He  places  one  in  front,  with  (Va^.  S.  XV,  15), 
'This  one  in  front,  the  yellow-haired  one,' — • 
Agni,  no  doubt,  is  in  front ;  and  as  to  his  saying  of 
him  as  (being)  '  in  front,'  it  is  because  they  take  him 
out  (of  the  Garhapatya  hearth)  towards  the  front, 
and  attend  upon  him  towards  the  front  ^  ;  and  as  to 
why  he  calls  him  yellow-haired,  it  is  because  Agni 
is,  as  it  were,  yellow; — 'the  sun-rayed  one,'  for 
Agni's  rays  are  like  those  of  the  sun  ; — 'and  Ratha- 
gr/tsa  and  Rathau,^as2,  his  commander  and  his 
chieftain,'  the  two  spring-months  are  these  two  ; — 
'and  the  nymphs  Pu;7^ikasthala  and  Kratu- 
sthalS.^,' — 'quarter  and  intermediate  quarter,'  said 
Mahitthi ;  but  army  and  battle  these  two  are  ; — 
'mordacious  beasts  the  shaft,  manslaughter 
the  missile,' — inasmuch  as  they  fight  in  army  and 
battle,  those  mordacious  beasts  are  the  shaft ;  '  man- 
slaughter the  missile,' — inasmuch  as  they  slay  one 
another,  manslaughter  is  the  missile  ; — '  to  them  be 
homage  !'  it  is  to  them  he  pays  homage  ; — '  be  they 
gracious  unto  us!'  they  are  indeed  gracious  to 
him  ; — '  he  whom  we  hate,  and  he  who  hates  us, 


'  See  p.  3,  note  2. 

"^  That  is,  'skilled  in  chariot  (-fight),'  and  'mighty  in  chariot 
(-fight).' 

^  The  meaning  of  these  names  is  rather  obscure  :  the  symbolical 
explanations  '  army  and  battle '  might  seem  to  point  to  some  such 
meanings  as  '  grounded  on  heaps '  and  '  grounded  on  intelligence 
(or  plan).' 


I06  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

him  we  put  into  their  jaws!'  whomsoever  he 
hates,  and  whoever  hates  him,  him  he  puts  into  their 
jaws.  'N.N.  I  put  into  their  jaws,*  thus  he  may 
name  him  whom  he  hates,  and  thereafter  he  will 
not  be  there  any  more.  Let  him  disregard  this  also, 
for  indeed  marked  out  of  himself  is  he  whom  he 
who  knows  this  hates. 

1 7.  Then  on  the  right  (south)  side  (he  places  one), 
with  (Va^.  S.  XV,  16),  'This  one  on  the  right, 
the  all-worker,'  the  all-worker  is  this  Vayu  (the 
wind)  who  blows  here,  for  he  makes  everything  here  ; 
and  because  he  speaks  of  him  as  (being)  '  on  the 
riofht,'  therefore  it  is  in  the  south  that  he  blows 
most;  —  'and  Rathasvana  (chariot-noise)  and 
Rathe/^itra  (glorious  on  the  chariot),  his  com- 
mander and  chieftain;'  these  are  the  two  summer- 
months  ; — 'and  the  two  nymphs,  Menaka  and 
Saha^anya,' — '  quarter  and  intermediate  quarter,' 
said  Mahitthi ;  but  these  two  are  heaven  and 
earth; — 'Goblins  the  shaft,  demons  the  missile;' 
for  goblins  indeed  are  here  the  shaft  (weapon),  and 
demons  the  missile; — 'to  them  be  homage  .  .  .!' 
the  import  of  this  has  been  explained. 

18.  Then  behind  (in  the  west,  he  lays  down  a 
brick),  with  (Va^.  S.  XV,  17),  'This  one  behind, 
the  all-embracer,' — the  all-embracer,  doubtless,  is 
yonder  sun  ;  for  as  soon  as  he  rises  all  this  embracing 
space  comes  into  existence  ;  and  because  he  speaks 
of  him  as  (being)  '  behind,'  therefore  one  sees  him 
only  when  he  goes  towards  the  back  (west); — 'and 
Rathaprota  (fixed  on  the  chariot)  and  Asama- 
ratha  (of  matchless  chariot),  his  commander  and 
chieftain  ;'  these  are  the  two  rainy  months  ; — '  and 
the  nymphs   Pramlo/v'anti  (the  setting  one)  and 


VIII    KAiVDA,    6    ADHYAYA,    1    BRAHMAiVA,   20,       lO/ 

Anumlo/t'anti  (the  rising  one),' — 'quarter  and 
intermediate  quarter,'  said  Mahitthi,  but  they  are 
day  and  night,  for  these  two  set  and  rise  ;  '  tigers 
the  shaft,  snakes  the  missile,'  for  indeed  tigers 
are  here  the  shaft,  and  snakes  the  missile; — 'to 
them  be  homage  .  .  . !'  the  import  of  this  has  been 
explained. 

19.  Then  on  the  left  (north)  side  (he  places  one), 
with  (Va^.  S.  XV,  17),  'This  one  on  the  left, 
of  everflowing  blessings;'  on  the  left  is  the 
sacrifice  ;  and  as  to  why  he  speaks  of  it  as  '  on  the 
left,'  it  is  because  the  sacrifice  is  performed  from 
the  left  (north)  side ;  and  as  to  why  he  speaks  of  it 
as  *  of  ever-flowing  blessings  (sawyadvasu),'  they  do 
indeed  flow  together  (sawyanti)  to  the  sacrifice, 
thinking, '  this  is  a  blessing  ; ' — '  and  T  arkshya  and 
Arish/anemi,  his  commander  and  chieftain,' 
these  are  the  two  autumn-months;  'and  the 
nymphs  Vi.9va/'i  (the  all-inclined)  and  GhrztaZ'i 
(the  ghee-inclined),'  — '  quarter  and  intermediate 
quarter,'  said  Mahitthi,  but  they  are  the  vedi  (altar) 
and  the  offering-spoon,  for  the  altar  is  all-inclined  \ 
and  the  offering-spoon  is  ghee-inclined  ; — '  water  the 
shaft,  wind  the  missile,' — water  indeed  is  here 
the  shaft,  and  wind  the  missile,  for  from  this  side  it 
blows  hot,  and  from  that  side  cold; — '  to  them  be 
homage  .  .  .  !'  the  import  of  this  has  been  explained. 

20.  Then  in  the  middle  (he  lays  down  one),  with 
(Va^.  S.  XV,  19),  'This  one  above,  the  boon- 
bestower  •^,'  the  one  above,  doubtless,  is  Par^anya 
(the  rain-god);  and  when  he  speaks  of  him  as  (being) 

^  That  is,  extending  in  every  direction,  or  open  (common)  to  all. 
^  Lit.  '  he  whose  boons  are  (bestowed)  hitherwards,' 


I08  .SATAPATHA-BRAHMAA^A. 

'  above,'  it  is  because  Par^anya  is  indeed  above ;  and 
when  he  calls  him  the  boon-bestower,  it  is  because 
from  there  the  boon,  rain,  food  for  creatures,  is 
bestowed  hitherwards; — 'and  Sena^it  (the  con- 
queror of  armies)  and  Sushena  (leader  of  a  fine 
army),  his  commander  and  chieftain,'  these  are 
the  two  winter-months;  —  'and  the  nymphs, 
Urva^t  and  Piirva5/6itti,' — 'quarter  and  inter- 
mediate quarter,'  said  Mahitthi,  but  they  are  oblation 
and  dakshi;^a  (priest's  sacrificial  fee); — 'thunder 
the  shaft,  lightning  the  missile,'  for  indeed 
thunder  is  here  the  shaft,  and  lightning  the 
missile; — 'to  them  be  homage  .  .  ..''the  import 
of  this  has  been  explained. 

2  1.  These,  then,  are  the  shafts  and  missiles  which 
the  gods  then  put  as  protectors  over  these  worlds, 
and  as  to  offspring  (or  subjects  ^),  they  are  the  com- 
mander and  chieftain ;  and  as  to  the  mates,  they  are 
those  nymphs, — having  thus  become  complete  with 
offspring  and  with  mates,  the  gods  seated  themselves 
on  that  firmament,  in  the  world  of  heaven ;  and  in 
like  manner  does  the  Sacrificer,  having  become  com- 
plete with  offspring  and  a  mate,  now  seat  himself  on 
that  firmament,  in  the  world  of  heaven. 

2  2.  Now,  these  are  ten  (Nakasad-Pa;'^/C'a/C'urt'a) 
bricks  he  lays  down  ; — of  ten  syllables  the  Vira^ 
consists,  and  this  layer  is  vira^  (far-shining).  There 
are,  however,  only  five  of  them,  for  he  lays  them 
down  by  two  and  two.  And,  verily,  they  are 
prayers  for  prosperity  to  Agni  (the  fire-altar).  He 
places  them  in  the  last  layer,  for  this,  the  last,  layer 
is  the  end  of  Ao-ni  :  it  is  thus  at  the  end  that  he 

*  See  paragraph  13. 


VIII    KANDA,    6    ADHYAYA,     2    BRAIIMAA^A,    I.         I O9 

pronounces  the  prayers  for  prosperity  to  Agni, 
There  are  five  of  them,  for  at  the  sacrifice  there  are 
five  prayers  for  prosperity  \  Between  (each)  two  he 
throws  loose  soil,  for  these  two  bricks  being  fires,  he 
does  so  fearing  lest  these  two  fires  should  blaze  up 
together.  And,  moreover,  loose  soil  means  food  :  it 
is  thus  by  means  of  food  that  he  brings  about 
concord  between  them. 

23.  Now,  then,  as  to  the  order  of  proceeding. 
Having  laid  down  (a  brick)  in  front,  he  lays  down 
those  on  the  right,  behind,  on  the  left,  and  in  the 
middle.  Then  the  upper  ones :  having  first  laid 
down  one  in  front,  he  lays  down  those  on  the  right, 
on  the  left,  in  the  middle,  and  behind.  And,  indeed, 
the  world  of  heaven  is  entered  from  below,  for  the 
gods,  having  at  that  time,  closed  up  these  \vorlds 
on  all  sides,  entered  the  world  of  heaven  from  below  ; 
and  in  like  manner  does  the  Sacrificer  now,  having 
closed  up  these  worlds  on  all  sides,  enter  the  world 
of  heaven  from  below. 

Second  Brahmatva. 

I.  He  lays  down  TT/^andasyas  ^  (bricks  pertaining 
to    the  metres).      Completed    now    was    the   entire 

^  Viz.  for  long  life,  offspring,  cattle,  social  distinction,  and  a  seat 
in  heaven  ; — see  the  Sijktavaka  I,  9,  i,  12  seqq. 

^  I'he  A7/andasyas  represent  the  principal  metres,  the  formulas 
used  in  laying  down  the  bricks  being  composed  in  the  respective 
metres.  They  consist  of  ten  sets  of  three  bricks  each,  representing 
the  ten  metres,  and  an  additional  (thirty-first)  brick  representing 
the  AtiX-z^andas,  or  redundant  metre.  Each  of  the  ten  sets  consists 
of  a  central  brick  of  full  size  (a  foot  square)  placed  on  one  of  the 
two  spines,  and  flanked  on  the  two  sides  not  in  contact  with  the 
spines  by  two  half-size  bricks,  viz. : — i.  gayatri  at  the  east  end  of 
the   'spine';    2.   trish/ubh  on  the   Reta/isi/t  range  (joining  the 


no  SATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

Ag-ni  (fire-altar).  He  now  wished  for  distinction^ ; 
for,  indeed,  heretofore  he  was  not  equal  thereto,  that 
he  should  sustain  distinction  ;  whence  people  here 
say  even  to  this  day,  '  This  one  is  not  equal  to 
sustain  distinction,  either  in  regard  to  kingship  or 
to  headmanship.'  The  gods  bestowed  on  him  this 
distinction,  these  AV^andasyas ;  for  the  metres 
(AV^andas)  are  cattle,  and  cattle  are  food,  and  (a 
position  of)  distinction  is  food. 

2.  He  lays  down  triplets,  for  the  beast  is  three- 
fold— father,  mother,  son  ;  and,  embryo,  amnion, 
chorion  ;  and  food  also  is  threefold — ploughing,  rain, 
seed.  One  of  them  is  an  Ati-(7/andas  ^  (excessive 
metre)  ;  for  even  whilst  being  one,  that  one  is  beyond 
all  the  metres.  And  as  to  that  distinction,  it  is  this 
great  hymn  of  praise  ^ ;  and  as  to  this  great  hymn  of 
praise,  it  is  these  A'/zandasyas. 

Gaihapatya  on  the  front,  or  east,  side);  3.^agatT,  on  the  Reta^si>^ 
range  (joining  the  Garhapatya  on  the  west  side);  4.  anush/ubh, 
immediately  behind  (west)  of  the  preceding  set;  5.  br/hati,  imme- 
diately in  front  (east)  of  the  Asha<//;a  range  (on  which  the  ring  of 
Stomabhagas  lies);  6.  ushwih,  immediately  behind  (west  of)  the 
Gayatris;  7.  kakubh,  immediately  in  front  of  the  br/hati  bricks; 
8.  pahkti,  at  the  right  (south)  end  of  the  'cross-spine';  9.  pada- 
pankti,  at  the  left  (north)  end  of  the  'cross-spine';  10.  the  single 
ati/f>^andas,  immediately  in  front  (east)  of  the  fifth  Asapatna  (see 
p.  84,  note  i);  11.  (three)  dvipada  at  the  back,  or  west,  end  of 
the  '  spine.' 

*  That  is,  a  position  of  honour,  or  dignity  (sn). 

~  By  the  metres,  here  and  in  the  sequel,  we  have  to  understand 
bricks  laid  down  with  verses  of  the  respective  metres  (Va^.  S.  XV, 
20  seq.). 

"  That  is,  the  so-called  Great  Litany  (mahad  uktham)  recited, 
by  the  Hotr/,  in  response  to  the  Mahavrata-saman,  or  Chant  of  the 
Great  Rite,  at  the  midday  service  of  the  last  but  one  day — the 
so-called  Mahavrata  day — of  the  sacrificial  session  called  '  Gavam 
ayanam,'  or  '  cows'  walk.'    The  Great  Litany  consists  of  numerous 


VIII    KAA'DA,    6    ADHYAYA,    2    BRAHMAA^A,    3.        Ill 


-1 
v3- 


Gayatri  verses  are  the  head  thereof,  Trlsh/ubh 
verses  the  body,  G^agati  verses  the  spine,  and  Parikti 
verses  the  wings ;  and  of  each  of  those  Kakubh 
verses  he  takes  four  syllables  ^  and   adds  them   to 

hymns,  and  some  detached  verses  and  prose  formulas ;  the  whole 
matter  recited  being  stated  to  amount  to  as  many  syllables  as  would 
make  up  a  thousand  Br/hati  verses  (of  thirty-six  syllables  each) — 
or  36,000  syllables  in  all.  From  an  analysis  I  have  made  of  the 
INIahad  ukiham  (or  Br/had  ukthom,  as  it  is  also  called)  as  contained 
in  MS.  Ind.  Off.  1729  D,  I  find  it  very  difficult  to  check  the  accuracy 
of  this  statement ;  my  own  calculation  yielding  somewhere  about 
37,200  syllables.  By  leaving  out  of  account  the  prose  formulas,  as 
well  as  certain  repetitions,  this  gross  amount  might,  however,  be 
reduced  to  something  approximating  the  stated  number  of  syllables  ; 
and,  indeed,  the  calculation  was  probably  not  meant  to  be  a  strictly 
accurate  one.  Cf  II,  3,  3,  19,  20  (where  read  Litany,  instead  of 
Chant),  part  ii,  p.  430.    See  also  IX,  i,  i,  44  ;  3,  3,  19  ;  5,  2,  12. 

^  The  three  Kakubh  verses  (Va^.  S.  XV,  38-40)  consist  each  of 
three  padas,  of  eight,  twelve,  and  eight  syllables  respectively,  making 
together  twenty-eight  syllables.  In  muttering  these  verses,  whilst 
laying  down  the  Kakubh  bricks,  he  is  to  omit  four  syllables  from 
the  middle  pada  of  each  verse  (so  as  to  make  it  equal  to  the  other 
two  padas),  and  mutter  the  words  thus  omitted  at  the  beginning  of 
the  verse  (XV,  47)  used  in  laying  down  the  Ati/('/mndas  brick.  The 
syllables  omitted  make  up  complete  words  in  each  case,  viz. '  bhadra 
rati/z '  at  the  beginning  of  the  middle  pada  of  the  first  verse,  '  vr/tra- 
tflrye'  at  the  end  of  the  middle  pada  of  the  second  verse,  and 
'  ava  sthira '  at  the  beginning  of  the  second  pada  of  the  third  verse. 
The  remaining  portions  of  the  Kakubh  verses  consist  each  of 
twenty-four  syllables,  or  a  Gayatri  verse.  The  references  here 
made  to  the  diff"erent  parts  of  the  Mahad  uktham  are  not  quite 
clear,  and  seem  to  point  to  a  somewhat  different  arrangement  of 
that  jastra  from  that  known  from  the  Aitareyarawyaka  and  the 
6'ahkhayana-sutra.  The  head,  indeed,  consists  of  Gayatri  verses, 
viz.  ^/g-veda  I,  7,  either  the  whole,  or,  according  to  some,  only 
certain  verses  of  it ;  the  first  three,  or  nine,  verses  also  forming  the 
opening  triplet,  or  triplets,  of  the  IVIahavrata-saman,  the  chanting 
of  which  precedes  the  recitation  of  the  Great  Litany. — For  the 
trunk  (atman)  consisting  of  trish/ubli  verses,  see  p.  113,  note  i. 
The  Pahkti  verses,  on  the  other  hand,  said  to  form  the  wings, 
would  seem  to  be  7?/g-veda  VIII,  40  (consisting  of  mahapahktis), 


I  I  2  5'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

the  Ati/(7/andas :  that  is  just  (what  makes)  that 
Ati/t7/andas  (excessive  metre).  The  others  result  in 
Gayatris  :  this  is  just  that  fourscore  of  Gayatris  ^, 
the  Brz'hatis  (make  up)  the  Barhata  one,  and  the 
Ush;^ihs  the  Aush;nha  one.  And  as  to  the  Va.Ta 
hymn  ^  the  two  half-verses,  the  Aindragna  (hymn), 
and  the  insertion,  they  are  Ati/'/zandas ;  and  as  to 

which  in  the  Aitareya  arrangement  forms  the  thighs,  whilst  6'ahkha- 
yana  makes  it  part  of  the  tail ;  and  the  Gagatis  here  referred  to  as 
constituting  the  spine  would  seem  to  be  X,  50,  which  immediately 
follows  the  hymn  just  referred  to,  and  is  not  otherwise  identified 
with  any  special  part  of  the  body.  The  MSS.  of  Harisvamin's 
commentary  are  unfortunately  hopelessly  corrupt  in  this  place. 

^  The  Great  Litany  begins  with  seven  sets  of  hymns  and  verses, 
meant  symbolically  to  represent  certain  parts  of  Agni-Pra_§-apati's 
bird-shaped  body  which  the  ceremony  is  intended  to  reconstruct, 
viz.  the  trunk,  neck,  head,  the  roots  (sinews)  of  the  wings,  the  right 
and  left  wings,  and  the  tail,  between  each  two  of  which  the  so-called 
SGdadohas  verse  {i?/g-veda  VIII,  69,  3),  meant  to  represent  the  vital 
air  pervading  the  body,  is  inserted,  as  it  also  is  between  (and  before) 
the  succeeding  parts.  In  the  first  place  there  follow  three  eighties 
of  triplets  (or,  3  sets  of  240  verses  each)  in  the  Gayatri,  Bnliati 
and  Ushwih  metres  respectively.  Then  comes  the  Va^a  hymn 
representing  the  belly,  and  finally  a  course  of  recitations  (beginning 
with  hymn  VIII,  40)  forming  the  thighs.  For  the  part  which  the 
number  eighty  plays  in  the  Agni>^ayana  ceremony,  see  Weber,  Ind. 
Stud.  XIII,  p.  167.  The  term  for  '  eighty,'  viz.  '  ajiti,'  gives  rise  to 
a  constant  etymological  play.  Sayawa,  on  Aitareyarawyaka  I,  4,  3,  i, 
takes  it  in  the  sense  of  '  food '  (cf  above,  VIII,  5,  2,  17) ;  whilst  the 
Ara/zyaka  itself  takes  it  in  that  of  '  obtainment ': — yad  evasmin 
loke  yaso,  yan  maho,  yan  mithuna?«,  yad  annadyawz,  ya  'pa/('itis  tad 
ajnavai,  tad  apnavani,  tad  avaruwadhai,  tan  me  'sad  iti. 

^  This  is  the  hymn  jR/g-veda.  VIII,  46,  ascribed  to  Va^a  Asvya., 
and  remarkable  for  the  variety  of  metres  in  which  the  different 
verses  are  composed.  In  the  Aitareya  recension  of  the  Mahad 
uktham  (which  is  followed  in  the  MS.  of  this  jastra  referred  to  in 
the  preceding  notes)  only  the  first  twenty  verses  are  recited,  but 
verse  15  being  divided  into  two  verses,  a  dvipada  and  an  ekapada, 
they  are  thus  made  to  consist  of  twenty-one  verses. 


VIII    KAA'DA,    6    ADHVAVA,    2    BRAHMAA'A,   5.       II3 


the  Nada-verse ',  the  Sudadohas,  the  pada-appen- 
dages,  and  whatever  AnushAibh  matter  there  is, 
they  make  up  the  Anush/ubhs. 

4.  Dvipada  verses  are  the  feet.  Thus  much  is 
the  great  hymn  of  praise,  and  the  great  hymn  of 
praise  means  distinction  :  the  gods  bestowed  upon 
him  (Agni)  all  that  distinction,  and  so  does  this 
(Sacrificer)  bestow  upon  him  all  that  distinction. 

5.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  lays  down  the  A7/an- 
dasyas.  The  gods  at  that  time  saw  that  firmament, 
the  world  of  heaven,  to  wit,  those  Stomabhagas,  and 
entered    it.     Of  those  entering,    Pra^^apati    entered 


^  The  Nada-verse,  i?/g-vecla  VIII,  69,  2  (in  the  ush;nh  metre) 
deriving  its  name  from  its  first  word  '  nadam,'  plays  a  peculiar 
part  in  the  recitation  of  the  Great  Litany.  The  opening  set  of 
recitations,  representing  the  trunk,  consists  of  twenty-two  trish/ubh 
verses ;  these  are  recited  in  such  a  way  that  after  each  pada  (or 
quarter  of  a  verse)  one  of  the  four  padas  of  the  Nada-verse  is 
inserted.  The  chief  object  of  this  insertion  seems  to  be  a  metrical 
one,  viz.  that  of  making  each  two  padas  (trish/ubh  =  eleven,  and 
ushwih  =  seven  syllables)  to  form  half  a  br/'hati  verse  (eighteen 
syllables),  the  whole  Litany  being  computed  by  brz'hati  verses. 
IMoreover,  of  v.  3  of  the  first  Trish/ubh  hymn  of  this  set  (i?/g-veda 
X,  120)  only  the  first  two  padas  are  recited  at  this  stage  (whilst  the 
remaining  two  are  recited  in  different  places  later  on),  and  this 
half- verse  is  followed  by  a  br/i)ali  and  a  satobrAati  pada  (VII,  32, 
23  c,  and  VI,  46,  2  c),  after  which  the  recitation  proceeds  with 
verse  4  of  the  first  hymn.  This  seems  to  account  for  one  of  the  two 
half-verses  here  referred  to,  whilst  the  other  would  seem  to  be 
VII,  20,  I  a,  b,  recited  later  on  in  the  j-astra.  Cf.  Prof.  F.  ]\Iax 
Mullcr's  translation  of  Aitareyar.,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  vol.  i, 
p.  i8i  seqq. — The  Aindragna  hymn  is  VIII,  40,  1-9  ;  1 1  ;  i  2,  being 
the  first  hymn  of  the  portion  representing  the  thighs.  It  consisis  of 
ten  mahapahkii  verses  (6x8  syllables)— each  of  which  is  split  up 
into  two  Gayatri  verses  (3x8  syllables) — and  one  trish/ubh  verse. — 
The  chief  anush/ubh  verses  are  those  of  i?/g-veda  I,  11,  1-8,  which 
are  recited  in  a  peculiar  way  (towards  the  end  of  the  jastra),  the  last 
pada  of  each  verse  interchanging  with  the  first  pada  of  the  next  verse. 

[43]  I 


114  i-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAA'A. 

last ;    and    thus    Pra^apati     is    the    same    as    these 
AV/andasyas. 

6.  Gayatris  are  his  head ;  and  as  to  its  being 
Gayatris,  it  is  because  the  head  is  of  Gayatri  nature  ^ 
There  are  three,  for  the  head  is  threefold.  He 
places  them  on  the  forepart  (of  the  altar),  for  the 
head  (of  the  animal  or  bird)  Is  in  front. 

7.  Trish/ubhs  are  the  chest :  he  places  them  on 
the  range  of  the  two  Reta/^si/§ ;  for  the  Reta/^siX'  are 
the  ribs,  and  the  ribs  lie  against  the  chest. 

8.  Cagatis  are  the  hips  ;  at  whatever  distance  from 
the  naturally-perforated  (central)  brick  he  places  the 
Trish/ubhs  in  front,  at  the  same  distance  from  it  he 
places  the  6^agatis  behind  ;  for  that  naturally-per- 
forated brick  is  this  vital  air  in  the  middle  (of  the 
body),  and  as  far  from  that  vital  air  as  the  chest  is  in 
front,  so  far  are  the  hips  behind. 

9.  Anush/ubhs  are  the  thighs :  he  places  them 
close  to  the  6^agatis,  and  thereby  places  the  thighs 
close  to  the  hips. 

1  o.  Brz'hatis  are  the  ribs,  Kakubhs  the  breast-bone. 
The  Br/hatis  he  places  between  the  Trish/ubhs  and 
Kakubhs,  whence  these  ribs  are  fastened  on  both 
sides,  on  the  breast-bone  and  the  costal  cartilages-. 

11.  Ush;^ihs  are  the  neck:  he  places  them  close 
to  the  Gayatris,  and  thereby  places  the  neck  close  to 
the  head. 

12.  Pahktis  are  the  wingfs  :  and  as  to  their  beinof 

^  Either  because  the  Gayatri  is  the  foremost  and  noblest  of  metres 
(whence  its  symbolical  connection  with  the  priestly  office  and  caste), 
and  tiie  one  used  for  the  first  stoma  at  the  Soma-sacrifice ;  or  on 
account  of  its  being  best  adapted  for  singing.  For  the  threefold 
nature  of  the  head,  as  consisting  of  skin,  bone,  and  brain,  see  XII, 

2,  4,  9- 

^  That  is,  on  both  sides  of  the  chest;  see  XII,  2,  4, 11,  with  note. 


VIII    KANDA,    6    ADHYAVA,    2    DRAHMAiVA,   1 6.      II  5 

Paiiktis,  it  is  because  the  wings  are  of  Pahkti  (five- 
fold) nature.  He  places  them  sideways,  for  these 
wings  are  sideways.  Whatever  metre  is  larger  that 
he  places  on  the  right  side :  he  thus  makes  the 
right  half  of  the  animal  the  stronger,  and  hence 
the  rioht  side  of  an  animal  is  the  stronofer. 

13.  An  Ati/'/^andas  is  the  belly;  for  the  metres 
are  cattle,  and  cattle  are  food,  and  food  is  (what  fills) 
the  belly,  because  it  is  the  belly  that  eats  the  food  : 
hence  when  the  belly  gets  the  food,  it  becomes  eaten 
and  used  up.  And  inasmuch  as  this  (brick)  eats 
(atti)  the  metres  (/7^andas),  the  cattle,  it  is  called 
Atti/'/^andas,  for  Atti/(7/anclas  is  really  what  is 
mystically  called  Ati/7/andas  ;  for  the  gods  love  the 
m}stic. 

14.  A  (brick)  covered  with  loose  soil  is  the  womb. 
These  two  he  lays  close  to  each  other,  for  the  belly 
and  the  womb  are  close  to  each  other.  They  are 
connected  w^ith  loose  soil,  for  loose  soil  means  flesh, 
and  both  the  belly  and  the  womb  are  connected  with 
flesh.  The  former  is  an  Ati/7^andas,  the  latter  a 
soil-bedded  one  (purishavati),  for  the  belly  is  higher, 
and  the  womb  lower. 

15.  He  places  them  so  as  to  extend  eastwards, 
for  in  an  easterly  direction  ^  this  Agni  (fire-altar)  is 
built ;  and,  moreover,  in  one  moving  forward,  both 
the  belly  and  the  womb  are  moving  forward.  Out- 
side the  Stomabhagas  (he  places  them),  for  the 
Stomabhagas  are  the  heart,  and  the  heart  is  highest, 
then  (comes)  the  belly,  then  the  womb. 

16.  He  places  them  south  of  the  naturally-per- 
forated  (brick).      Now,  in  the  first  layer,  he  places 

^  Or,  as  one  tending  (flying)  eastwards. 
I  2 


I  1-6  5'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

both  the  belly  and  the  womb  north  of  the  naturally- 
perforated  one^;  for  that  naturally-perforated  one, 
indeed,  is  what  this  vital  air  in  the  middle  (of  the 
body)  is  :  he  thus  places  the  belly  and  the  womb  on 
both  sides  of  that  (central)  vital  air,  and  hence  the 
belly  and  the  womb  are  on  both  sides  of  that  central 
vital  air. 

17.  The  Dvipadas  are  the  feet  (the  stand); — and 
as  to  its  being  Dvipadas  (verses  of  two  feet),  it  is 
because  the  feet  are  a  pair.  There  are  three  (such 
verses),  for  a  stand  ^  (tripod)  is  threefold.  He  lays 
them  down  at  the  back,  for  the  feet  are  at  the  back 
(of  the  body). 

18.  That  body  of  his  (Agni)  is  well-made; — and, 
indeed,  for  whomsoever  they  thus  make  that  body 
of  his  so  as  to  be  well-made,  he  becomes  possessed 
of  that  body  of  his  as  a  well-made  one  ;  but  for 
whomsoever  they  make  it  otherwise  than  that, 
for  him  they  make  that  body  of  his  so  as  to  be 
ill-made,  and  he  becomes  possessed  of  an  ill-made 
body. 

19.  It  is  with  reference  to  this  that  these  two 
sama-nidhanas  (finales  of  saman-hymns)  are  uttered, 
— '  The  light  (is)  in  the  highest  heaven  of  the  gods,' 
and,  '  The  gods  (are)  in  the  highest  heaven  of  the 

'  According  lo  VII,  5,  i,  38,  the  fire-pan  is  supposed  to  repre- 
sent the  belly,  and  the  mortar  the  yoni ;  and  these  two  were,  in  the 
first  layer,  placed  north  of  the  svayam-at;7>/?/a,  or  naturally-perforated 
brick,  so  as  to  leave  the  space  of  a  full  brick  between  them  and  that 
central  brick  of  the  layer;  of.  VII,  5,  i,  13.  In  the  sketch  of  the 
central  part  of  the  first  layer  (p.  17),  the  two  northernmost  bricks, 
marked  /,  represent  the  fire-pan  and  mortar. 

-  That  is,  the  feet  and  back  part  of  the  body,  or  the  tail,  the 
latter,  in  a  sitting  bird,  forming,  as  it  were,  a  third  foot  or  support 
to  the  body. 


VIII    KANDA,    6    ADHYAYA,    3    BRAHMAiVA,  3.        II7 

light;' — for  when  on  that  occasion  the  gods  were 
entering  (heaven),  Pra^apati  was  the  last  to  enter : 
that  is  why  he  says,  '  The  light  (is)  in  the  highest 
heaven  of  the  gods.'  And  as  to  why  he  says,  'The 
gods  (are)  in  the  highest  heaven  of  light,' — the  light, 
doubtless,  is  this  Agni  (the  fire-altar),  and  it  is  on 
his  highest  layer  that  all  the  gods  have  thus  entered  : 
this  is  why  he  says,  '  The  gods  are  in  the  highest 
heaven  of  light.' 


Third   Brahmatva. 

1.  He  lays  down  the  Garhapatya.  For  the 
gods,  having  obtained  this  much,  thought  they  had 
succeeded.  They  spake,  '  Whereby  have  we  suc- 
ceeded in  this  ? ' — '  By  means  of  the  Garhapatya,' 
they  said  ;  '  for,  after  building  the  Garhapatya  ^  and 
mounting  thereon,  we  saw  the  first  layer,  from  the 
first  (we  saw)  the  second,  from  the  second  the  third, 
from  the  third  the  fourth,  from  the  fourth  the  fifth, 
and  from  the  fifth  this  one.' 

2.  They  spake,  '  Think  ye  upon  this,  how  there 
may  be  success  here  for  us  ! '  They  spake,  '  Medi- 
tate ye  (/6it) ! '  whereby,  indeed,  they  meant  to  say, 
'  Seek  ye  a  layer  {/Ail) !  seek  ye  whereby  there  may 
be  success  here  for  us ! ' 

3.  Whilst  meditating,  they  said  this :  '  Let  us 
bring  this  one  here  and  put  it  on  (the  fire-altar)  ! ' 
Having  brought  this  (Garhapatya)  here,  they  put  it 


'  For  the  building  of  the  separate  Garhapatya  hearth,  on  which 
the  sacred  fire  was  transferred  from  the  Ukha  (fire-pan),  see  part  iii, 
p.  298  seq. ;  its  sketch,  j).  302.  A  similar  hearth  is  now  built  on 
the  fifth  layer  of  the  Ahavaniya  fire-altar. 


Il8  5ATAPATHA-BRAHMAA'A. 

on.  They  disputed  about  it: — in  the  front  part  (of 
the  fifth  layer)  the  Vasus,  on  the  right  side  the 
Rudras,  on  the  hind  part  the  Adityas,  on  the  left 
side  the  Maruts,  and  above  it  the  Vi.?ve  Devas 
said,  'Here  let  us  lay  it  down!  here  let  us  lay  it 
down  ! ' 

4.  They  spake, '  Let  us  lay  it  down  in  the  middle: 
when  laid  down  in  our  midst,  it  will  belong  to  all  of 
us.'  They  laid  it  down  in  the  middle  (of  the  fifth 
layer),  and  thus  they  laid  that  success  into  the  self 
(or  the  body  of  the  altar) ; — in  the  middle  (they  laid 
it) :  they  thus  laid  that  success  into  the  very  middle 
of  (Agni's  and  their  own)  self  And  in  like  manner 
does  the  Sacrificer,  when  he  lays  down  the  Garha- 
patya,  lay  that  success  into  (his  own)  self;  and  (by 
laying  it  down)  in  the  middle,  he  lays  that  success 
into  the  very  middle  of  the  self. 

5.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  lays  down  the  Garha- 
patya.  The  Garhapatya,  doubtless,  is  food,  and  this 
built  Agni  is  an  eater  :  it  is  to  the  eater  he  thus 
offers  that  food ; — in  the  centre  (he  lays  down  the 
Garhapatya) :  in  the  very  middle  (of  the  body)  he 
thus  lays  food  into  him. 

6.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  lays  down  the  Garha- 
patya. The  world  of  the  gods,  doubtless,  is  the 
Vedi  (altar-ground) ;  but  that  (original  Garhapatya) 
is  built  up  outside  the  Vedi :  thus,  when  he  brings  it 
here  and  lays  it  down  (on  the  fire-altar),  he  then 
establishes  it  (or  him,  Agni)  on  the  Vedi,  in  the 
world  of  the  gods. 

7.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  lays  down  the  Garha- 
patya.    The  lotus-leaf  1,  doubtless,  is   a  womb,  but 

^  For  the  lotus-leaf,  which  is  the  first  thing  laid  down  in  the  centre 


VIII    KANDX,    6    ADIIVAVA,   3   BRAHMAA'A,    lO.        II9 


that  (Garhapatya)  is  built  up  outside  the  womb,  and 
outside  of  the  womb  indeed  takes  place  that  per- 
formance regarding  the  fire-altar  which  takes  place 
prior  to  the  (laying  down  of  the)  lotus-leaf:  thus, 
when  they  bring  it  (the  Garhapatya)  here  and  lay  it 
down,  he  then  establishes  it  in  the  womb,  on  the 
lotus-leaf;  and  thus  indeed  it  is  not  outside.  Eieht 
bricks  he  lays  down  :  the  significance  of  this  has 
been  explained ^  He  builds  it  up  with  the  same 
formulas  and  in  the  same  order,  for  this  one  is  the 
same  as  that  (former  Garhapatya  Agni)  :  he  thus 
brings  it  (or  him)  here  and  lays  it  down. 

8.  He  then  lays  down  the  Puna^'/'iti  ^.  Now  at 
that  time  the  gods,  having  built  the  Garhapatya,  did 
not  find  success  therein ;  for  the  Garhapatya  pile  is 
a  womb,  and  success  in  a  womb  consists  in  seed,  in 
generative  power ;  and  in  this  womb  they  saw  no 
seed,  no  generative  power. 

9.  They  spake,  '  Think  ye  upon  this,  how  we  may 
lay  seed  and  generative  power  into  this  womb ! ' 
They  spake,  '  Meditate  ye ! '  whereby,  indeed,  they 
meant  to  say,  '  Seek  ye  a  layer !  seek  ye  that  we 
may  lay  seed  and  generative  power  into  this 
womb ! ' 

10.  Whilst  meditating,  they  saw  this  Punaj/'iti, 
and  put  it  on  (the  Garhapatya),  and  thereby  laid 
seed  and  generative  power  into  this  womb  ; — in  the 
centre   (they   placed   it) :    they   thus   laid   seed   and 

of  the  altar-site  on  which  the  (Ahavaniya)  altar  is  to  be  raised,  see 
VII,  4,  I,  7  seqq.  The  Garhapatya  had  been  built  previous  to 
that  (VII,  I,  I,   I  seqq.). 

*  See  VII,  I,  I,  19  seqq. 

^  The  Punaj'/('iti  (re-piling)  is  a  second  pile  or  layer  of  eight 
bricks  corresponding  exactly  to  the  first,  and  placed  thereon. 


I20  S-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAA^A. 

generative  power  into  the  very  middle  of  this  womb. 
And  in  Hke  manner  does  the  Sacrificer  now,  when 
he  lays  down  the  Puna5-/iti,  lay  seed  and  generative 
power  into  this  womb ; — in  the  centre  (he  lays  it 
down) :  he  thus  lays  seed  and  generative  power  into 
the  very  middle  of  this  womb. 

11.  Now  some  lay  it  down  on  the  hind  part  (of 
the  bird-like  altar),  because  it  is  from  the  hind  part 
that  seed  is  introduced, — (to  wit)  on  the  juncture  of 
the  tail  (and  the  body),  for  it  is  from  (the  part  near) 
the  tail  that  seed  is  introduced.  Let  him  not  do 
this,  for  they  who  do  this  lay  seed  and  generative 
power  outside  the  womb ;  but  let  him  rather  place 
it  in  the  centre  :  he  thus  lays  seed  and  generative 
power  right  into  the  womb. 

12.  He  lays  down  eight  bricks,  —  the  Gayatri 
(metre)  consists  of  eight  syllables,  and  Agni  (the 
fire  altar)  is  of  Gayatri  nature  :  as  great  as  Agni  is, 
as  great  as  is  his  measure,  so  great  he  thus  intro- 
duces him  in  the  form  of  seed.  Five  times  he  '  settles' 
it, —  of  five  layers  consists  the  fire-altar,  five  seasons 
make  a  year,  and  Agni  is  the  year  :  as  great  as  Agni 
is,  as  great  as  is  his  measure,  by  so  much  he  thus 
introduces  him  in  the  form  of  seed.  Eight  bricks  he 
'  settles '  five  times,  that  makes  thirteen, — thirteen 
months  make  a  year,  and  there  are  thirteen  '  layer- 
fillings  '  of  the  altar  :  as  great  as  Agni  is,  as  great 
as  is  his  measure,  so  great  he  thus  becomes. 

13.  And  as  to  why  he  lays  down  the  Puna.T/'iti. 
Now,  in  laying  down  the  Garhapatya  (hearth)  upon 

A 

the  Ahavaniya,  he  surely  does  what  is  improper  ; 
but  when  he  lays  down  the  Punai-z^iti  he  thereby 
brings  this  Agni  (or  altar)  that  has  been  built,  and 
builds  it  up  again  thereon ;  and  because  he  again 


VIII    KAiVDA,    6    ADHYAVA,  3  BRAHMAiVA,    1 7.         12  1 

(punas)  builds  up  {/cl)  that  (Agni)  already  built, 
therefore  (this  is  called)  Puna^'/'iti. 

14.  Now  some  lay  down  the  Garhapatya  on  the 
hind  part,  and  the    Punai'/'iti   on   the   front   part  (of 

A 

the  built  altar),  for  these  two  are  the  Ahavaniya  and 
the  Garhapatya,  and  these  two  fires  are  (placed)  in 
this  way  ^     Let  him  not  do  this,  for  the  Garhapatya 

A 

is  this  (terrestrial)  world,  and  the  /\havaniya  is  the 
sky ;  and  above  this  (earth)  surely  is  yonder  (sky) ; 
let  him  therefore  place  it  (the  Puna.9/6iti)  on  the  top 
of  that  (Garhapatya). 

15.  And  as  to  why  he  lays  down  both  the  Garha- 
patya and  the  Puna^/'iti.  These  two,  doubtless,  are 
the  Vedi  and  the  Uttaravedi  (high-altar)  of  Agni. 
Now  those  two  former  (altars  of  this  kind)  which  he 
throws  up  -  belong  to  the  Soma-sacrifice,  but  these 
belong  to  the  fire-altar ;  and  when,  after  laying 
down  these  two,  he  deposits  Agni  (the  fire)  thereon, 
then  he  establishes  him  both  on  the  Vedi  and  the 
Uttaravedi. 

16.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  lays  down  the 
Punaj/iti.  This,  doubtless,  is  a  repeated  sacrifice 
(punarya^;}a),  and  higher  (than  the  ordinary  sacri- 
fice) is  this  worship  of  the  gods :  he  thus  sets 
up  a  repeated  sacrifice,  and  the  higher  worship 
of  the  gods  ;  and  the  repeated  sacrifice  inclines 
(accrues)   to  him. 

17.  And,   again,    as    to    why    he    lays   down   the 

^  In  the  ordinary  sacrifices  the  Garhapatya  hearth  is  placed 
behind  (west  of),  and  the  Ahavaniya  on  the  front  (or  east)  end 
of,  the  Vedi. 

^  That  is,  at  the  performance  of  an  ordinary  Soma-sacrifice.  For 
the  vedi  and  uttaravedi  on  that  occasion,  see  III,  5,  i,  i  seq. ; 
1 2  seqq.  (part  ii,  p.  1 1 1  seqq.) 


122  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

Puna^/'iti.  This  (altar),  doubtless,  is  that  same 
Agni  whom  in  the  beginning  the  vital  airs,  the 
7?zshis,  made  up^.  He  now  builds  him  up  again; 
and  inasmuch  as  he  again  (punas)  builds  up  (Z'i) 
that  (Agni)  already  built,  therefore  also  it  is  (called) 
Puna^/'iti. 

1 8.  [He  lays  down  the  first  brick,  with,  Va^.  S. 
XV,  49],  'With  what  fervour  the-/?/shis  entered 
upon  the  sacrificial  session,' — he  thereby  means 
those  i^/sh  is  (the  vital  airs); — 'kindling  the  fire 
and  gaining  the  light,' — that  is,  'kindling  the  fire, 
and  gaining  the  heavenly  world;' — 'upon  that 
firmament  I  place  the  Fire,' — the  firmament, 
doubtless,  is  the  heavenly  world  ; — '  whom  thinkers 
call  the  straw-spreader,' — the  thinkers  (or  men) 
are  they  who  are  wise  ;  and  '  straw-spreader '  he  says, 
because  he  (Agni)  has  ever  the  (sacrificial)  straw 
spread  for  him. 

19.  [The  second  brick,  with,  Vaf.  S.  XY,  50], 
'With  our  wives  let  us  follow  him,  O  gods! 
with  our  sons  and  brothers,  or  our  golden 
treasures;' — that  is,  'let  us  follow  him  with  our 
all;' — 'gaining  the  firmament  in  the  world  of 
righteousness;' — the  firmament,  doubtless,  is  the 
heavenly  world  :  thus,  '  gaining  the  heavenly  world 
in  the  world  of  righteousness  ;  '• — '  above  the  third 
luminous  back  of  the  sky,' — for  this,  indeed,  is 
the  third  luminous  back  of  the  sky  where  this  (Agni) 
now  burns  ^ 


^  See  part  iii,  p.  143. 

*  That  is,  on  this  altar  where  the  fire  will  soon  be  burning. 
It  seems  also  to  refer  to  the  sun  burning  over  the  third  heaven — 
as  the  counterpart  of  the  Agni  of  the  fire-altar. 


VIII    KAiVDA,    6    ADHYAYA,    3   BRAHMAiVA,   22.       1 23 


20.  [The  third  brick,  with,  Va^.  S.  XV,  51],  'Unto 
the  centre  of  speech  did  he  mount,  the  nimble,' 
— for  this,  indeed,  is  the  centre  of  speech  where  he 
now  is  built  up  ;  and  '  the  nimble  (bhura;^yu),'  that 
is,  'the  sustainer  ^  (bhartar) ; ' — 'this  Agni,  the 
good  lord,  the  heedful,' — that  is,  'this  Agni,  the 
lord  of  the  good,  the  heeding  one  ; ' — '  established 
upon  the  back  of  the  earth,  he  the  brilliant,' — 
— that  is,  '  established  on  the  back  of  the  earth,  the 
shining  one;' — 'let  him  tread  under  foot  any 
hostile!' — that  is,  'let  him  tread  under  foot  all 
evildoers.' 

21.  [The  fourth  brick,  with,  Va^.  S.  XV,  52], 
'This  Agni,  the  most  mettlesome  bestower 
of  strength,' — that  is,  'the  most  vigorous  bestower 
of  strength;' — 'may  he  glow  a  thousandfold, 
unremitting,' — that  is,  'may  he  shine  a  thousand- 
fold, not  unheedful ; ' — 'blazing  in  the  middle 
of  the  sea,' — the  sea,  doubtless,  means  these 
worlds  :  thus,  '  shining  in  these  worlds  ; ' — '  go 
forth  to  the  divine  abodes!' — thatis,'go  forth 
to  the  heavenly  world  ! ' 

22.  [The  fifth  brick,  with,Va^.  S.  XV,  53],  'Gather 
ye  together!  draw  ye  nigh  together!' — he 
thereby  says  to  those  Tv/shis,  '  Gather  ye  him 
together  !  draw  ye  nigh  to  him  together  ! ' — '  Make 
ye  Agni's^  paths  to  lead  to  the  gods!' — as 
the  text  so  the  meaning; — 'making  the  parents 

^  That  is,  the  sustainer  of  the  world  (^agad-bhartar),  according 
to  Mahidliara ;  an  etymological  play  on  the  word  '  bhura/zyu.' 

'^  The  texts  have  '  agne,'  O  Agni  !  the  verbal  form  '  k/7>/u- 
dhvam '  being  explained  by  INIahidhara  as  an  irregular  singular 
form  for  '  kn>/u,'  (make  thou).  The  verse  seems,  however, 
corrupt. 


124  SATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

young  again,' — the  young  parents,  doubtless,  are 
speech  and  mind,  and  these  two  fires  also  are 
speech  and  mind;  —  'in  thee  hath  he  spun 
out  this  thread,'- — he  thereby  means  that  thread 
(of  the  sacrifice)  which  has  been  spun  out  by  the 
i?/shis. 

23.  [The  sixth  brick,  with,  Va^.  S.  XV,  54], 
'Awake,  O  Agni,  and  be  watchful !' — he  thereby 
says  to  this  Agni,  'Wake  thou  over  this  one',  and 
watch  thou  over  him!' — 'Wish  and  fulfilment, 
meet  ye  and  he  together-!' — as  the  text,  so 
the  meaning; — 'Upon  this,  the  higher  seat,' — 
the  higher  seat,  doubtless,  is  the  sky; — 'sit  ye 
down,  O  All-gods,  and  the  Sacrificer!' — he 
thereby  makes  the  Sacrificer  sit  down  together  with 
the  Vii-ve  Devas^ 

24.  [The  seventh  brick,  with,  Vaf.  S.  XV,  55], 
'Whereby  thou  carriest  a  thousand,  whereby, 
O  Agni,  all  wealth,' — for  that,  indeed,  is  his  most 
acceptable  power  whereby  he  carries  a  thousand, 
and  all  wealth; — 'thereby  lead  thou  this  sacri- 
fice of  ours  unto  the  light  to  go  to  the  gods!' 
— that  is,  '  thereby  lead  thoil  this  oilr  sacrifice  to 
the  heavenly  world  to  go  to  the  gods.' — [The  eighth 
brick,  with,  Va^.  S.  XV,  56],  'This  is  thy  natural 
womb  .  .  . ;' — the   meaning  of  this   has  been   ex- 

'  The  author  (not  Mahidhara)  seems  rather  to  take  '  udbu- 
dhyasva '  in  a  transitive  sense  ('  wake  thou  him '),  as  Mahidhara 
certainly  does  the  second  imperative  '  prati^agr/hi,'  'make  him 
(the  Sacrificer)  careful ! ' 

^  The  text  has  the  2nd  person  dual,  which  Mahidhara  explains 
by  the  3rd  dual  (ya^i;^amanena  saha  sa/wsr/sh/e  bhavatam — '  May 
the  two  become  united  with  the  Sacrificer'),  because  of  the  nomi- 
native '  ish/apurve,'  instead  of  the  vocative. 


VIII    KANDA,    7    ADHYAYA,     I     BRAHMAA'A.    4.        I  25 

plained  \      Eight  bricks  he  lays  clown  :   the  meaning- 
of  this  also  has  been  explained  -. 

Seventh  Adhyaya.     First  Brahmaa'a. 

1.  He  lays  down  two  Rit3.vy3.  (seasonal  bricks). 
The  seasonal  (bricks)  are  the  same  as  these  seasons : 
it  is  the  seasons  he  thereby  lays  down.  And,  in- 
deed, the  seasonal  ones  are  everything  here,  for  the 
seasonal  ones  are  the  year,  and  the  year  is  every- 
thing here  :  he  thus  lays  down  everything  here. 
And  generative  power  they  also  are, — for  the 
seasonal  ones  are  the  year,  and  the  year  means 
generative  power  :  it  is  generative  power  he  thus 
lays  down  (or  bestows  on  Agni  and  the  Sacrificer). 

2.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  lays  down  seasonal 
(bricks), — the  seasonal  (ones)  are  the  nobility  and 
these  other  bricks  are  the  peasantry :  he  thus 
places  the  nobility  as  the  eater  among  the  peasantry. 
He  lays  down  (some  of)  them  in  all  the  layers  :  he 
thus  places  the  nobility  as  the  eater  among  the 
whole  people  ^ 

3.  And.  again,  as  to  why  he  lays  down  seasonal 
(bricks), — this  fire-altar  is  the  year,  and  it  is  joined 
together  by  means  of  the  seasonal  (bricks)  :  he  thus 
makes  the  year  continuous,  and  joins  it  together,  by 
means  of  the  seasons.  These  (formulas  of  the 
seasonal  bricks)  begin  in  a  different  way,  but  end 
in  the  same  way  ;  for  the  seasons  were  created,  and, 
when  created,  they  were  different. 

4.  They  spake, '  While  being  thus,  we  shall  not  be 


1  Viz.  VII,  I,  I,  28.  "  Viz.  VII,  I,  I,  32. 

^  Or,  he  places  the  chieftaincy  in  every  clan. 


126  S-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

able  to  procreate  :  let  us  unite  with  our  forms  ! ' 
They  united  in  each  single  season  with  their  forms, 
whence  there  is  in  each  single  season  the  form  of  all 
the  seasons.  As  to  their  (formulas)  beginning  in 
a  different  way,  it  is  because  they  were  created 
different  (or  separately) ;  and  as  to  their  ending  in 
the  same  way,  it  is  because  they  united  with  their 
forms. 

5.  He  lays  them  down,  with  (Va/.  S.  XV,  57), 
'  Tapa  and  Tapasya,  the  two  dewy  seasons,' — 
these  are  the  names  of  these  two  :  it  is  thus  by  their 
names  that  he  lays  them  down.  Tapa  (the  burner), 
doubtless,  is  yonder  sun  :  from  him  these  two 
seasons  are  not  separated  ;  and  inasmuch  as  these 
two  seasons  are  not  separated  from  him,  they  are 
called  Tapa  and  Tapasya. 

6.  '  Agni's  coupling-link  thou  art,' — this  fire- 
altar  is  the  year,  and  it  is  joined  together  by  means 
of  the  seasonal  (bricks)  :  he  thus  makes  the  year 
continuous,  and  joins  it  together  by  means  of  the 
seasons; — 'May  Heaven  and  earth  fit  into  one 
another!  may  the  waters  and  plants  fit  into 
each  other!  ' — he  thereby  makes  everything  here  ^ 
to  fit  in  by  means  of  the  seasons  : — '  May  the  fires 
fit  into  one  another,  each  singly,  working 
harmoniously  together  for  my  supremacy!' — 
for  these  sinorle  bricks  are  the  same  as  those  fires  : 
he  thus  says  this  so  that  they  may  fit  in  with  each 
other  for  the  supremacy  of  those  two  seasons ; — 
'  whatever  fires  there  are,  at  one  with  each 
other,  within  these  two.  Heaven  and  Earth;' — 
as  the  text  is,  so  is  its  meaning; — 'let  them  draw 

^  Or,  all  this  universe. 


VIII    KANDA,    7    ADHYAVA,     I     BRAHMAiVA,    Q.        I  27 

together,  fitting  in  with  the  two  dewy  seasons, 
even  as  the  gods  draw  together  unto  Indra;' — 
that  is,  '  even  as  the  gods  are  drawing  together 
round  Indra,  so  may  they  draw  togetlier  for 
supremacy  round  these  two  seasons.'  Two  bricks 
there  are,  because  the  season  consists  of  two 
months.  Only  once  he  '  settles  '  them  :  he  thereby 
makes  the  season  to  be  one. 

7.  And  as  to  why  he  now  lays  down  these  two ; — 
this  fire-altar  is  the  year,  and  the  year  is  these 
worlds  :  the  fifth  layer  of  this  (altar)  is  the  sky, 
and  the  dewy  season  of  this  ()  ear)  is  the  sky  ;  and 
when  he  now  lays  down  these  two  (bricks),  he 
thereby  restores  to  his  (Agni's)  body  what  these  two 
are  thereto  :  this  is  why  he  now  lays  down  these 
two  (bricks). 

8.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  now  lays  down  these 
two ; — this  Agni  (the  fire-altar)  is  Pra^apati  (the 
lord  of  generation),  and  Pra^apati  is  the  year  :  the 
fifth  layer  is  his  (Agni's)  head,  and  the  dewy  season 
is  its  (the  year's)  head ;  and  when  he  now  lays  down 
these  two  (bricks),  he  thereby  restores  to  his  (or  its) 
body  what  these  two  are  thereto  :  this  is  why  he 
now  lays  down  these  two  (bricks). 

9.  He  lays  down  the  two  seasonal  ones  prior 
to  the  naturally-perforated  one  and  to  the  Vijva- 
^yotis ;  for  the  last  naturally-perforated  one  is  the 
sky',  and   the  last  Vi^-va^yotis  ^  (all-light    brick)   is 

^  For  the  symbolic  meaning  of  the  three  svayam-atr/z/z/as,  as 
the  central  bricks  of  the  first  and  third  layers,  and  the  one  lying  on 
the  centre  of  the  fifth  layer,  see  part  iii,  p.  155,  note  8. 

*  On  the  three  Vi^va^f  yotis  bricks,  placed  in  the  same  layers,  as 
representing  the  gods  Agni,  Vayu  and  Aditya  respectively,  see 
VI,  3,  3,  16;  5,  3,  3. 


128  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

the  sun  :  he  thus  places  the  seasons  on  this  side 
of  the  sky  and  the  sun  ;  whence  the  seasons  are 
on  this  side  thereof.  But  generative  power  there 
also  is  {in  these  seasonal  bricks)^:  he  thus  places 
generative  power  on  this  side  of  the  sky  and  the 
sun  ;  whence  procreation  takes  place  only  on  this 
side  of  them,  but  stationary,  indeed,  is  procreation 
beyond  them,  for  just  as  many  gods  as  there  were 
of  old,  so  many  there  are  now. 

10.  Now,  the  (first)  two  seasonal  (bricks)  he  lays 
down  subsequently  to  the  first  naturally-perforated 
one,  and  to  the  first  Vii^va^yotis ;  for  the  first 
naturally-perforated  one  is  this  (earth),  and  the  first 
Vii-va^otis  is  Agni  :  thereupon  he  places  the 
seasons,  whence  the  seasons  are  upwards  from  this 
(earth).  But  generative  power  there  also  is  therein: 
he  thus  places  generative  power  above  this  (earth) ; 
whence  procreation  only  takes  place  above  (upon, 
not  under)  this  (earth). 

11.  Let  him  not  derange  these  (seasonal  bricks)^ 
lest  he  should  derange  the  seasons,  for  deranged  are 

'  Or,  But  these  (bricks)  also  are  (or  mean)  generative  power, 
cf.  paragraph  i. 

'^  That  is,  he  is  not  to  shift  them  from  their  proper  place,  but 
place  each  subsequent  pair  exactly  on  those  laid  down  before. 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  however,  these  two  bricks  (if  we  determine  their 
site  by  mere  calculation)  would  seem,  in  the  fifth  layer,  to  lie 
by  half  a  foot  further  away  fiom  the  ccntial  point,  than  the  i?/tavyas 
of  the  other  layers  do.  This  is  owing  to  the  fact  that  whilst,  in 
the  layers  in  which  a  Sva}amat;7>ma  lies  in  the  middle,  only  one 
half  of  these  central  bricks  lie  on  the  east  side  of  the  central  point, 
in  the  present  layer  the  eastern  portion  of  the  Garhapatya  (occu- 
pying the  central  part  of  the  layer)  consists  of  full-sized  bricks. 
This  discrepancy  of  half  a  foot  was  probably  made  good  by  some 
space  being  left,  which  was  afterwards  filled  up  with  earth  ;  unless, 
indeed,  the  Svayamatrmwas,  as  apparently  natural  stones,  were 
allowed  to  somewhat  exceed  the  ordinary  size  of  bricks. 


VIII    KANDA,   7   ADHYAYA,   I   URAHMAA^A.    l6.  T  29 

the  seasons  for  him  who  dies  :  hence,  in  whatever 
place  he  lays  down  the  first  two,  there  let  him  lay 
down  all. 

1 2.  But  the  seasonal  (bricks),  indeed,  are  also 
these  (three)  worlds  :  by  the  (different)  layers  he 
thus  builds  up  these  worlds  one  above  the  other. 
And  the  seasonal  (bricks),  indeed,  are  also  the 
nobility :  by  the  (different)  layers  he  thus  builds 
up  the  nobility  above  (the  peasantry).  And  the 
seasonal  ones,  indeed,  are  also  the  year :  by  the 
(different)  layers  he  thus  builds  up  the  year.  Let 
him  not  thereafter  place  over  them  any  other  brick 
with  a  sacrificial  formula,  lest  he  should  place  the 
peasantry  above  the  nobility. 

13.  Now  these  same  (bricks)  are  indeed  stepping- 
stones,  for  by  means  of  the  seasonal  (bricks)  the 
gods  then  stepped  over  these  worlds,  both  from 
hence  upwards  and  from  above  downwards  :  and  in 
like  manner  does  the  Sacrificer  now,  by  means  of  the 
seasonal  (bricks),  step  over  these  worlds,  both  from 
hence  upwards  and  from  above  downwards. 

14.  Now,  the  A'arakadhvaryus  lay  down  here  yet 
other  'stepping-stones';  but  let  him  not  do  so,  for 
they  do  what  is  redundant,  and  these  are  indeed 
(all)  the  stepping-stones. 

15.  He  then  lays  down  a  Vi^va^yotis  (all-light 
brick) ; — the  last  Vi^va^yotis,  doubtless,  is  the  sun, 
for  in  yonder  (celestial)  world  the  sun,  indeed,  is  '  all 
the  light '  :  it  is  the  sun  he  thereby  sets  up. 

16.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  lays  down  a  Vii-va- 
^^yotis  : —  the  Vi^va^yotis,  doubtless,  means  progeny, 
for  progeny  indeed  is  all  the  light : — he  thus  lays 
generative  power  into  it  (or  into  him,  Agni  and  the 
Sacrificer). 

[43]  K 


130  i-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAA^A. 

17.  He  lays  down  the  Vii-va^yotis  prior  to  the 
naturally-perforated  one;  —  for  the  last  naturally- 
perforated  one  is  the  sky,  and  the  last  Vii-vafyotis 
is  the  sun :  he  thus  places  the  sun  on  this  side 
(below)  the  sky,  whence  he  burns  only  on  this  side 
thereof.  But  there  also  is  generative  power  therein  : 
he  thus  places  generative  power  on  this  side  of  the 
sky,  whence  procreation  takes  place  only  on  this 
side  thereof, 

18.  Now  the  (first)  Vi^va^yotis  he  lays  down  sub- 
sequent to  the  first  naturally-perforated  one  ;  for  the 
first  naturally-perforated  one  is  this  (earth),  and  the 
first  Vi^va^yotis  is  Agni :  he  thus  sets  up  Agni 
upwards  from  this  (earth),  whence  the  fire  blazes 
upwards  from  here.  But  there  also  is  generative 
power  therein :  he  thus  places  generative  power 
above  this  (earth),  whence  procreation  only  takes 
place  above  this  (earth). 

19.  And  the  (second)  Vi^va^yotis  he  lays  down 
subsequent  to  the  second  naturally-perforated  one 
(in  the  third,  or  central)  layer ;  for  the  second 
naturally-perforated  one  is  the  air,  and  the  second 
Vii-va^yotis  is  Vayu  (the  wind)  :  he  thus  places  the 
wind  in  the  air,  whence  that  wind  (has  his  abode) 
in  the  air. 

20.  These  (three)  then  are  the  lights  ; — and  when 
he  lays  down  these  (three  Vi^va^yotis  bricks)  in  this 
way,  he  thereby  sets  up  those  same  lights  so  as  to 
face  each  other ;  and  hence  the  fire  blazes  upwards 
from  this  (earth),  and  yonder  sun  shines  downwards, 
and  that  wind  blows  sideways  in  the  air. 

21.  [He  'settles'  the  Vi^va^otis,  with,  Va^.  S. 
XV,  58],  'May  Paramesh//nn  settle  thee' — for 
Paramesh/Z/in  saw  this  fifth  layer; — 'on  the  back 


VIII    KAiVDA,    7    ADHYAYA,    2    BRAHMAA^A,     I.        I3I 

of  the   sky,   thee,   the   luminous   one!' — for  on 
the  back  of  the  sky  is  yonder  hmiinous  sun. 

22.  'For  all  out-breathing,  and  off-breath- 
ing, and  through-breathing,' — for  the  Vi^'va^yo- 
tis  is  the  breath,  and  breath,  indeed,  is  (necessary)  for 
everything  here; — 'bestow  thou  all  the  light!' — 
that  is,  'bestow  thou  the  whole  (or  every)  light;' 
— 'Surya  is  thine  overlord,' — he  thereby  makes 
Surya  (the  sun)  its  overlord.  Having  'settled'  it, 
he  pronounces  the  Sudadohas  on  it :  its  (symbolical) 
meaning  has  been  told  \ 

23.  Now,  these  (bricks)  are  indeed  stepping-stones. 
for  by  means  of  the  Vi^va^yotis  (bricks)  the  gods 
then  stepped  over  these  worlds,  both  from  hence 
upwards,  and  from  above  downwards  :  and  in  like 
manner  does  the  Sacrificer  now,  by  means  of  the 
Vi^yva^yotis,  step  over  these  worlds,  both  from  hence 
upwards,  and  from  above  downwards. 

24.  Now,  the  A'arakadhvaryus  lay  down  here  yet 
other  '  stepping-stones ';  but  let  him  not  do  so,  for 
they  do  what  is  redundant,  and  these  are  indeed 
the  stepping-stones. 

Second  Brahmajva. 

I.  He  then  lays  down  a  Lokampr/z^a-  (space- 
filling brick) ;  the  Lokampr/;^a,  doubtless,  is  yonder 

^  For  this  verse  see  part  iii,  p.  307,  note  2;  for  its  symbolic 
meaning  (as  the  breath,  or  vital  air)  VII,  i,  i,  15;  26.  See  also 
VIII,  7,  3,  21,  where  the  verse  itself  is  explained. 

^  In  laying  down  the  Lokamprzwas  of  the  fifth  layer,  he  begins, 
as  in  the  first  layer,  from  the  right  shoulder,  or  the  south-east 
corner,  of  the  altar,  but  so  that  in  this  case  the  first  '  space-filler ' 
is  laid  down,  not  at  the  corner,  but  a  cubit  to  the  west  of  it. 
Starting  from  that  spot,  he  fills  up  the  available  spaces,  in  two 
turns,  moving  in  the  sunwise  fashion. 

K   2 


132  5ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

sun,  for  he  fills  these  worlds  :  it  is  thus  yonder  sun 
he  thereby  sets  up.  He  lays  down  this  (Lokam- 
•prma)  in  all  the  (five)  layers,  for  those  layers  are 
these  (three)  worlds  ^ :  he  thus  places  the  sun  in  (all) 
these  worlds,  whence  he  shines  for  all  these  worlds. 

2.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  lays  down  a  Lokam- 
prtnA, — the  hokampri/ia,  doubtless,  is  the  nobility 
(or  chieftaincy)  ^,  and  these  other  bricks  are  the 
peasants  (or  clansmen) :  he  thus  places  the  nobility 
(or  chieftain),  as  the  eater,  among  the  peasantry. 
He  lays  it  down  in  all  the  layers  :  he  thus  places 
the  nobility,  as  the  eater,  among  the  whole  peasantry 
(or  in  every  clan). 

3.  Now  this  is  only  a  single  (brick) :  he  thus 
makes  the  nobility  (or  the  chieftaincy)  and  (social) 
distinction  to  attach  to  a  single  (person).  And 
what  second  (such  brick  there  is)  that  is  its  mate, 
— a  mate,  doubtless,  is  one  half  of  one's  own  self, 
for  when  one  is  with  a  mate  then  he  is  whole  and 
complete  :  (thus  it  is  laid  down)  for  the  sake  of 
completeness.  With  a  single  formula  he  lays  down 
many  bricks  ^ :  he  thereby  endows  the  nobility  pre- 

^   Rather,  the  first,  second,  and  third  layers  are  the  three  worlds. 

^  At  VI,  I,  2,  25  Ta7;c/ya  was  made  to  maintain  that  the  Ya^ush- 
matis,  or  bricks  laid  down  with  special  formulas,  were  the  nobility, 
and  that  the  Lokampr/was,  laid  down  with  one  and  the  same  formula, 
were  the  peasants,  and  as  the  noble  (or  chieftain)  required  a 
numerous  clan  for  his  subsistence,  there  should  be  fewer  of  the 
former  kind  of  bricks,  than  the  established  practice  was.  This 
view  was  however  rejected  by  the  author  of  the  Brahma;/a,  and  here, 
in  opposition  to  that  view,  the  Lokampn'wa  is  identified  with  the 
nobility,  and  the  Ya^iishmatis  with  the  clan. 

^  The  common  formula  used  with  these  bricks,  and  from  which 
they  derive  their  name — beginning  as  it  does  '  Lokam  pr/na,,'  '  Fill 
the  space  ! '  see  parag.  6 — is  pronounced  once  only  after  evcvy  ten 
such  bricks,  and  after  any  odd  ones  at  the  end. 


VIII    KANDA,    7    ADHYAVA,    2    BRAHMAA^A,    5.         I33 

eminently  with  power  \  and  makes  the  nobihty  more 
powerful  than  the  peasantry.  And  the  other  (bricks) 
he  lays  down  singly,  with  separate  formulas :  he 
thereby  makes  the  peasantry  less  powerful  than  the 
nobility,  differing  in  speech,  and  of  different  thoughts 
(from  one  another). 

4.  The  first  two  (Lokampr/;/as)  he  lays  down  in 
that  (south-east)  corner  :  he  thereby  places  yonder 
sun  in  that  quarter :  from  this  (earth)  he  follows 
him  (the  sun)  from  that  (place)  there  - ;  from  this 
(earth)  he  follows  him  from  that  (place)  there  ;  from 
this  (earth)  he  follows  him  from  that  (place)  there ; 
from  this  (eardi)  he  follows  him  from  that  (place) 
there. 

5.  And  in  whatever  place  he  lays  down  the  first 
two   (bricks),  let   him   there   lay  down  alongside  of 

^  In  the  translation  of  VII,  5,  2,  14  (part  iii,  p.  404),  the 
passage  '  having  taken  possession  of  the  man  by  strength,'  which 
was  based  on  a  wrong  reading  (see  Weber,  Berl.  Cat.  II,  p.  69), 
should  read  thus  :  '  having  pre-eminently  endowed  man  with  power ' 
(or,  perhaps,  '  having  placed  him  above  (others)  in  respect  of 
power,'  St.  Petersb.  Diet.) 

2  I  do  not  know  whether  '  atas '  might  be  taken  here  in  the 
sense  of  '  ihither,'  or  whether  it  goes  along  with  '  tasmat,'  merely 
strengthening  it.  The  meaning  in  either  case  would  seem  to 
be  this.  In  the  first  turn  of  filling  up  the  empty  spaces  he  first 
moves  along  from  the  south-east  corner  (the  point  where  the 
sun  rises)  to  the  back  or  west  end  of  the  spine  (the  place  where 
the  sun  sets)  and  the  central  brick  ;  and  having  thus,  as  it  were, 
touched  the  earth  again,  he  proceeds  from  there  in  the  same 
sunwise  fashion,  filling  up  the  north  part  of  the  altar  until  he 
reaches  the  east  end  of  the  spine,  and  there,  as  it  were,  touches  the 
earth  once  more.  In  the  second  turn  he  again  begins  (with  the 
second  brick)  in  the  south-east,  and  repeats  the  same  process,  in 
filling  up  the  south  part  of  the  altar,  and  completing  at  the  south- 
east corner.  The  laying  down  of  the  Lokanipr/«as  would  thus 
be  supposed  to  occupy  the  full  space  of  two  days  and  two  nights. 


134  5ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

them  the  last  two  (bricks)  :  for  (otherwise)  having 
once  revolved  round  these  worlds,  that  sun  would 
not  pass  by  them.  Let  him  lay  down  the  two  last 
alongside  the  two  first  by  reaching  over  them :  he 
thus  causes  that  sun  to  pass  by  these  worlds ;  and 
hence  that  sun  revolves  incessantly  round  these 
worlds  again  and  again  (from  left)  to  right. 

6.  [He  lays  them  down,  with,  Vac^.  S.  XV,  59], 
'Fill  the  space!  fill  the  gap!' — that  is,  'fill  up 
the  space!  fill  up  the  gap;' — '  and  lie  thou  steady!' 
— that  is,  '  and  lie  thou  firm,  settled  ! ' — '  Indra  and 
Agni,  and  Brz'haspati,  have  settled  thee  in  this 
womb;'  that  is,  'Indra  and  Agni,  and  Br/haspati, 
have  established  thee  in  this  womb.'  Thus  (he 
establishes  them)  by  an  anush/ubh  verse  ;  for  the 
Anush/ubh  is  speech,  and  Indra  is  speech,  and  the 
'space-filler'  is  Indra.  He  does  not  settle  them,  for 
that  (sun)  is  unsettled.  He  pronounces  the  Suda- 
dohas  on  them,  for  the  Sudadohas  is  vital  air  :  he 
thus  makes  him  (Agni)  continuous  and  joins  him 
together  by  means  of  the  vital  air. 

7.  Here  now  they  say,  '  How  does  that  Lokam- 
prins.  become  of  unimpaired  strength  ?  '  Well,  the 
Lokamp7'/;/a  is  yonder  sun,  and  he  assuredly  is  of 
unimpaired  strength.  And  the  Lokampr/;^a  also 
is  speech,  and  of  unimpaired  strength  assuredly  is 
speech. 

8.  Having  laid  down  those  (bricks)  possessed  of 
(special)  sacrificial  formulas,  he  covers  (the  altar) 
with  the  Lokampr?;^a  ;  for  the  bricks  possessed  of 
formulas  mean  food,  and  the  Lokamp;7/^a  means 
the  body  :  he  thus  encloses  the  food  in  the  body, 
whence  food  enclosed  in  the  body  is  the  body 
itself. 


VIII    KAA^DA,     7    ADHYAYA,    2    BRAHMAiVA.     II.        I35 


9.  Those  (bricks)  possessed  of  formulas  he  places 
on  the  body  (of  the  altar)  itself,  not  on  the  wings 
and  tail  :  he  thus  puts  food  into  the  body ;  and 
whatever  food  is  put  into  the  body  that  benefits 
both  the  body  and  the  wings  and  tail ;  but  that 
which  he  puts  on  the  wings  and  tail  benefits  neither 
the  body,  nor  the  wings  and  tail. 

10.  On  the  body  (of  the  altar)  he  places  both 
(bricks)  possessed  of  formulas  and  Lokamp/'/V/as  ; 
whence  that  body  (of  a  bird)  is,  as  it  were,  twice  as 
thick.  On  the  wings  and  tail  (he  places)  only 
Lokampr/;^as,  whence  the  wings  and  tail  are,  as  it 
were,  thinner.  On  the  body  (of  the  altar)  he 
places  them  both  lengthwise  and  crosswise,  for  the 
bricks  are  bones  :  hence  these  bones  in  the  body 
run  both  lenq-thwise  and  crosswise.  On  the  wines 
and  tail  (he  places  them  so  as  to  be)  turned  away 
(from  the  body),  for  in  the  wings  and  tail  there  is 
not  a  single  transverse  bone.  And  this,  indeed,  is 
the  difference  between  a  built  and  an  unbuilt  (altar) : 
suchlike  is  the  built  one,  different  therefrom  the 
unbuilt  one  ^ 

11.  The  Svayamat;7W;^a  (naturally  -  perforated 
brick)  he  encloses  with  Lokamprz//a  (bricks) ;  for 
the  naturally-perforated  one  is  the  breath,  and  the 
'  space-filler '  is  the  sun  :  he  thus  kindles  the  breath 
by  means  of  the  sun,  whence  this  breath  (of  ours)  is 
warm.  With  that  (kind  of  brick)  he  fills  up  the 
whole  body  :  he  thereby  kindles  the  whole  body  by 
means  of  the  sun,  whence  this  whole  body  (of  ours) 
is  warm.  And  this,  indeed,  is  the  difference 
between  one  that  will  live  and  one  that  will  die  : 


'  Thai  is,  one  not  properly  built. 


I  X6  i-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAA^A. 


he  that  will   live  is  warm,  and  he  that  will  die  is 
cold. 

12.  From  the  corner  in  which  he  lays  down  the 
first  two  (Lokamp7'mas)  he  goes  on  filling  up  (the 
altar)  by  tens  up  to  the  Svayamatr//^/^a.  In  the 
same  way  he  goes  on  filling  it  up  from  left  to  right 
behind  the  naturally-perforated  one  up  to  (the 
brick  on)  the  cross-spine  ^  He  then  fills  it  up 
whilst  returninor  to  that  limit  -. 

13.  The  body  (of  the  altar)  he  fills  up  first,  for 
of  (a  bird)  that  is  produced,  the  body  is  produced 
first,  then  the  right  wing,  then  the  tail,  then  the 
left  (wing)  :  that  is  in  the  rightward  (sunwise)  way, 
for  this  is  (the  way)  with  the  gods,  and  thus, 
indeed,  yonder  sun  moves  along  these  worlds  from 
left  to  riorht. 

14.  The  LokamprZ/^a,  doubtless,  is  the  same  as 
the  vital  air  ;  he  therewith  fills  up  the  whole  body 
(of  the  altar)  :  he  thus  puts  vital  air  into  the  whole 
body.  If  he  were  not  to  reach  any  member  thereof, 
then  the  vital  air  would  not  reach  that  member  of 
him  (Agni);  and  whatever  member  the  vital  air  does 
not  reach,  that,  assuredly,  either  dries  up  or  withers 
away  :  let  him  therefore  fill  up  therewith  the  whole 
of  it. 

1 5.  The  wings  and  tail  he  builds  on  to  the  body, 
for  the  wings  and  tail  grow  on  to  the  body  ;  but 
were  he  first  to  lay  down  those  (bricks)  turned  away 
(from  the  body),  it  would  be  as  if  he  were  to  take 
a  limb  from  elsewhere  and  put  it  on  again. 

'  This  would  seem  to  be  ihe  Vikarwi  (see  VIII,  7,  3,  9  seqq.) 
which,  however,  like  the  central  Svayamatr/««a,  is  only  to  be  laid 
down  after  the  layer  has  been  levelled  up. 

^  Viz.  to  die  east  end  of  the  '  spine.' 


VIII    KANDA,    7    ADHYAYA,    2    BRAHMAiVA,     I  7.        I37 


16.  Let  him  not  lay  down  either  a  broken  (brick) 
or  a  black  one  ;  for  one  that  is  broken  causes  failure. 
and  sickly  is  that  form  which  is  black  :  '  Lest 
1  should  make  up  a  sickly  body,'  he  thinks  \  Let 
him  not  throw  aside  an  unbroken  (brick),  lest  he 
should  put  what  is  not  sickly  outside  the  body. 
Whatever  (bricks),  in  counting  from  the  dhish/zya 
hearths,  should  exceed  a  Vira^^  and  not  make  up 
another,  such  (bricks)  indeed  cause  failure  :  let  him 
break  them  and  throw  them  '  (ut-kir)  on  the  heap  of 
rubbish  (utkara),  for  the  heap  of  rubbish  is  the  seat 
of  what  is  redundant :  thus  he  thereby  settles 
them  where  there  is  the  seat  of  that  which  is 
redundant. 

17.  Now,  then,  of  the  measures  of  the  bricks. 
In  the  first  and  last  layers  let  him  lay  down  (bricks) 
of  a  foot  (square),  for  the  foot  is  a  support ;  and  the 
hand  is  the  same  as  the  foot.  The  largest  (bricks) 
should  be  of  the  measure  of  the  thigh-bone,  for 
there  is  no  bone  larger  than  the  thigh-bone.  Three 
layers  should  have  (their  bricks)  marked  with  three 
lines,  for  threefold  are  these  w^orlds  ;   and  two  (layers 


'  Here,  as  so  often  before,  the  effect  to  be  avoided  is  expressed 
by  a  clause  in  ora//o  dirccta  with  '  ned ' ;  the  inserted  clause  with 
'  vai '  indicating  the  reason  why  that  effect  is  to  be  dreaded.  To 
adapt  the  passage  to  our  own  mode  of  diction,  we  should  have  to 
translate  : — Let  him  not  lay  down  either  a  broken  brick  or  a  black 
one,  lest  he  should  form  a  sickly  body ;  for  a  brick  which  is  broken 
comes  to  grief,  and  what  is  black  is  of  sickly  appearance. — In  the 
ne.xt  sentence  of  the  translation,  the  direct  form  of  speech  has 
been  discarded. 

2  Hie  pada  of  the  Vira^  consists  of  ten,  and  a  whole  Vira^ 
stanza  of  thirty  (or  forty),  syllables.  Hence  the  number  of  th(.- 
bricks  is  to  be  divisible  by  ten. 

^  Or,  perhaps,  dig  them  in. 


138  5'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

may  consist)  of  (bricks)  marked  with  an  indefinite 
number  of  lines,  for  these  two  layers  are  the  flavour, 
and  the  flavour  is  indefinite  ;  but  all  (the  layers) 
should  rather  have  (bricks)  marked  with  three  lines, 
for  threefold  are  all  these  worlds. 

18.  Now,  then,  of  the  location^  of  (special)  bricks. 
Any  (special)  brick  he  knows,  provided  with  a 
formula,  let  him  place  in  the  middle  (third)  layer  ; 
for  the  middle  layer  is  the  air,  and  the  air,  doubtless, 
is  the  location  of  all  beincrs.  Moreover,  bricks 
with  (special)  formulas  are  food,  and  the  middle 
layer  is  the  belly  :  he  thus  puts  food  into  the  belly. 

19.  Here,  now,  they  say,  '  Let  him  not  lay  down 
(such  special  bricks)  lest  he  should  do  what  is 
excessive.'  But  he  may,  nevertheless,  lay  them 
down ;  for  such  bricks  are  laid  down  for  (the 
fulfilment  of  special)  wishes,  and  in  wishes  there  is 
nothing  excessive.  But  let  him  rather  not  lay  them 
down,  for  just  that  much  the  gods  then  did. 

Third  Brahma/va. 

1.  He  now  throws  loose  soil  (on  the  layer)  ;  for 
the  loose  soil  means  flesh  :  he  thus  covers  him 
(Agni)  with  flesh.  [He  does  so]  after  having  laid 
down  the  bricks ; — the  bricks  are  the  bone  :  he  thus 
covers  the  bone  with  flesh. 

2.  He  also  strews  it  on  (the  place  where  lies)  the 
naturally-perforated  (brick),  for  the  naturally-per- 
forated   one    means    vital    air,   and    the    loose    soil 


^  Avapana  has  also  the  meaning  of  '  throwing  in,  insertion,' 
which  is  likewise  understood  here,  whilst  further  on  in  this  para- 
graph ('  the  air  is  the  avapanam  of  all  beings ')  it  can  scarcely 
have  this  meaning  (?  something  injected).     Cf.  IX,  4,  2,  27. 


VIII    KANDA,    7    ADIIYAYA,    3    BRAHMAiVA,    6.        1 39 

means  food  :  he  thus  puts  food  into  (the  channels  of) 
the  vital  air.  In  that  manner^  he  covers  the  whole 
l)ody  (of  the  altar)  ;  whence  the  food  which  is  put 
into  (the  channels  of)  the  vital  air  benefits  the  whole 
body,  extends  over  the  whole  body. 

3.  '  Let  him  not  strew  it  on  (the  place  of)  the 
naturally-perforated  one,'  say  some,  '  lest  he 
should  stop  up  (the  channels  of)  the  vital  airs,  for 
the  naturally-perforated  one  is  the  vital  air.'  Let 
him,  nevertheless,  strew  it,  for  the  vital  airs  are 
sustained  by  food,  and  whoever  eats  no  food  his 
(channels  of  the)  vital  airs  grow  up  (and  close) : 
hence  he  for  whom  thev  act  thus,  comes  to  exist  in 
yonder  world  even  like  a  dry,  hollow  tube.  Let  him, 
therefore,  by  all  means  strew  (loose  soil)  on  (the 
place  of)  the  naturally-perforated  one. 

4.  Having  strewed  it  on  the  svayamatr/;//za 
(place)  he  goes  on  covering  (the  altar)  from  the 
(brick)  on  the  cross-spine  up  to  the  enclosing-stones. 
In  the  same  way  he  goes  on  covering  it  from  left  to 
right  behind  the  naturally-perforated  one  up  to  the 
one  on  the  cross-spine  again. 

5.  The  body  (of  the  altar)  he  covers  first,  for  of 
(a  bird)  that  is  produced,  the  body  is  the  first  to  be 
produced  ;  then  the  right  wing,  then  the  tail,  then 
the  left  wing  :  that  is  in  the  rightward  (sunwise) 
way,  for  this  is  (the  way)  with  the  gods. 

6.  Now  this  loose  soil,  indeed,  is  the  vital  air; 
he  therewith  covers  the  whole  body  :  he  thus  puts 
vital  air  into  the  whole  body.  And,  assuredly, 
whatsoever  member  thereof  he  should  not  reach, 
that  member  of  him  (Agni)  the  vital  air  would  not 

'  Or,  ihcrewiih  (wiih  loose  soil). 


140  ^-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

reach  ;  and  whatever  member  the  vital  air  does  not 
reach  that  either  dries  up  or  withers  away  :  let  him, 
therefore,  cover  it  entirely  therewith. 

7.  [He  scatters  the  loose  soiP,  with,  Vaf .  S.  XV, 
56;  7?/g-veda  I,  1 1,  i],  'They  all  have  magnified 
Indra,' — for  all  beings,  indeed,  magnify  Indra  ; — 
'  the  voices,  him,  of  ocean-wide  extent,' — he 
thereby  alludes  to  his  greatness  ; — 'the  foremost 
of  charioteers,' — for  of  charioteers  he  is  the 
greatest  charioteer; — '  the  lordly  lord  of  viands/ 
— viands  mean  food  :  thus,  '  the  lordly  lord  of  food.' 
With  this  anush/ubh  verse  addressed  to  Indra  he 
scatters  it ;  for  the  loose  soil  belonofs  to  Indra  :  that 
(layer  of)  loose  soil  is  one  half  of  Agni  (the  fire- 
altar),  the  (other)  half  is  the  collection  of  bricks. 

8.  Here,  now,  they  say,  '  Whilst  he  lays  down  the 
bricks  with  all  kinds  of  metres,  and  with  (verses 
addressed  to)  all  deities,  he  now  scatters  (the  soil) 
with  a  single  (verse)  addressed  to  a  single  deity, — 
how  is  this  one  half  of  Agni?'  Indra,  surely,  is 
equal  to  all  the  gods  ;  hence  in  that  he  scatters  it 
with  a  (verse)  addressed  to  Indra,  this  (soil)  is 
one  half  of  Agni.  And  as  to  its  being  (done)  with 
an  anush/ubh  verse,— the  Anush/ubh  is  speech, 
and  all  metres  are  speech  :  thereby  also  it  is  one 
half. 

9.  He  then  lays  down  the  Vikar;<?i  and  Svayam- 
2.\.rinn^  (bricks), — the  Vikar/<!i  is  Vayu  (the  wind), 
and  the  last  naturally-perforated  one  is  the  sky :  he 
thus  sets  up  both  the  wind  and  the  sky.  He  lays 
them  down  as  the  last  (highest),  for  wind  and  sky 
are  the  highest ;    and  close  together,  for  wind  and 


^  Taking  it  from  the  edge  of  the  A'atvala  or  pit,  cf.  VII,  i,  i,  36. 


VIII    KAA'DA,    7    ADHYAYA,    3    BRAHMAiVA,     12.        I4I 


sky  are  close  together.  The  Vikar/^i  he  lays  down 
first  :  he  thereby  places  the  wind  on  this  side  of  the 
sky ;  whence  that  wind  blows  only  on  this  side 
(thereof). 

10.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  lays  down  the 
Vikar;d.  When,  on  that  (former)  occasion,  they 
make  the  horse  smell  (the  pile  of  bricks  of)  the 
(first)  layer  \  then  )onder  sun  strings  these  worlds 
to  himself  on  a  thread.  Now  that  thread  is  the 
same  as  the  wind  ;  and  that  wind  is  the  same  as 
this  Vikar/^i  :  thus  when  he  lays  down  the  latter, 
then  yonder  sun  strings  to  himself  these  worlds  on 
a  thread. 

11.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  lays  down  the 
Vikar;2i  and  the  Svayamatr^V^;^a ;  the  Vikar;/i, 
doubtless,  is  vital  power,  and  the  naturally-perforated 
one  is  vital  air :  he  thus  bestows  both  vital  power 
and  vital  air.  He  lays  them  down  as  the  two  last 
(highest  bricks),  because  vital  power  and  vital  air 
are  the  two  highest  (endowments) ;  and  close  to- 
gether, because  vital  power  and  vital  air  are  closely 
(bound)  together.  The  upper  (northern)  Vikar;^! 
he  lays  down  first'-:  he  thereby  encloses  the  vital 
air  on  both  sides  in  vital  power. 

12.  [He  lays  it  down,  with,  Va^.  S.  XV,  62  ;  J^tg- 
veda  VH,  3,  2],  'When,  like  a  snorting  steed, 
that  longeth  for  the  pasture,  he  started  forth 
from  the  great  enclosure,  then  the  wind 
fanned  his  flame,  and  black  then  was  thy 
path;' — for  when  the  wind  fans  his  (Agni's)  flame. 


'  See  VII,  3,  2,  13. 

2  As  '  uttaram  '  means  both  '  northern  '  and  '  higher,'  so  '  ])urvam  ' 
means  both  'first'  and  'eastern,'  hence,  by  a  whimsical  play  on 
these  double  meanings, '  on  both  (or  two)  sides.' 


142  ^-ATAPATHA-BRAHMA.VA. 

then  his  path  does  become  black.  With  a  trish/ubh 
verse  he  lays  it  down,  because  Vayu  (the  wind)  is  of 
trish/ubh  nature  ;  with  one  relating  to  Agni,  because 
it  is  Agni's  performance ;  with  an  undefined  one, 
because  Vayu  is  undefined.  And  as  to  his  saying 
'  the  wind,'  Vayu  indeed  is  the  wind. 

13.  He  then  lays  down  the  Svayamatr/?i/^a,  with 
(Va^.  S.  XV,  63),  '  I  s.eat  thee  in  the  seat  of  the 
vital  power,' — the  vital  power,  doubtless,  is  yonder 
(sun),  and  his  seat  this  is; — 'the  animating,' — for 
he  (the  sun)  animates  all  this  universe; — 'in  the 
shadow,' — for  in  his  shadow  all  this  universe  is; — 
'in  the  heart  of  the  sea,'  —  for  this,  indeed,  is  the 
heart  of  the  (aerial)  sea  ^ ; — 'the  radiant,  the  lu- 
minous,'— for  radiant  and  luminous  is  the  sky; — 
'thou  that  illumines  the  sky,  the  earth  and 
the  wide  air;' — for  thus,  indeed,  does  he  (the  sun) 
illumine  these  worlds. 

14.  'May  Paramesh///in  settle  thee,'  —  for 
Paramesh/-^in  saw  this  fifth  layer  ^. 

15.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  lays  it  down  by 
means  of  Paramesh//^in.  When  Pra^apati  had 
become  disjointed,  the  deities  took  him  and  went 
off  in  different  directions.  Paramesh//^in  took  his 
head,  and  kept  going  away  from  him. 

16.  He  spake  to  him,  '  Come  to  me  and  restore 
unto  me  that  wherewith  thou  hast  gone  from  me ! ' 
— '  What  will  therefrom  accrue  to  me  ?  ' — 'That  part 
of  my  body  shall  be  sacred  to  thee!' — 'So  be  it!' 
So  Paramesh///in  restored  that  to  him. 

17.  Now  that  last  self-perforated    (brick)    is  just 


^  The  topmost  naturally-perfoiated  brick  represents  the  heavens. 
•^  See  VI,  2,3.5;   10. 


VIII    KANDA,    7    ADHYAYA,    3    BRAIIMAiVA,    20.        1 43 

that  part  of  him  (Pra^apati-Agni)  ;  and  when  he 
now  la)s  it  down  in  this  place,  he  thereby  restores 
to  him  what  part  of  his  body  this  is  :  that  is  why 
he  lays  it  down  in  this  place. 

18.  '  On  the  back  of  the  sky,  thee,  the  wide 
and  broad  one!' — for  this  (top  of  the  altar)  is 
indeed  the  back  of  the  sky,  and  it  is  both  wide  and 
broad' ; — '  Sustain  thou  the  sky  !  make  firm  the 
sky!  injure  not  the  sky!' — that  is,  'Sustain  thy 
self,  make  firm  thy  self,  injure  not  thy  self  (body) ! ' 

19.  'For  all  out-breathing,  off-breathing, 
through-breathing,  up-breathing!' — the  natu- 
rally-perforated (brick)  is  the  vital  air,  and  the 
vital  air  truly  serves  for  everything  here; — 'for 
a  resting-place,  for  a  moving-place!' — the 
naturally-perforated  (bricks)  are  these  worlds,  and 
these  worlds  are  the  resting-place  and  the  moving- 
place  ; — '  May  Surya  guard  thee,' — that  is,  '  May 
Surya  protect  thee,' — 'with  mighty  well-being,' — 
that  is,  'with  great  well-being;' — 'with  the  safest 
roof!' — that  is,  'with  whatever  roof  (abode)  is  the 
safest.' 

20.  Separately  he  lays  them  down,  for  separate 
are  wind  and  sky  ;  and  once  only  he  '  settles '  them  : 
he  thereby  makes  them  the  same,  for  vital  power 
and  vital  air  are  the  same.  They  are  both  of  them 
stones  and  both  of  them  naturally-perforated  ;  for 
vital  power  and  vital  air  are  the  same.  He  then 
pronounces  the  Sudadohas  over  them, — the  Suda- 
dohas     means    vital     air ;     he     thus     makes     them 


^  Though,  in  the  text  of  the  formula,  the  adjectives  are  feminine, 
and  evidently  refer  to  the  brick,  the  author  here  makes  them 
neuter,  referring  them  to  '  pnsh///am,'  the  back  (of  the  sky). 


144  5ATAPy\THA-BRAHMAiVA. 

continuous,  joins   them   together  by  means   of  the 
vital  air, 

21.  'Those  his  well-like  milking  ones\' — 
a  well  (siida)  means  water,  and  milking  means 
food; — 'the  speckled  ones  mix  the  Soma,' — the 
speckled  (cow)  means  food; — 'at  the  birth  of  the 
gods,' — the  birth  of  the  gods  is  the  year; — 'the 
tribes,' — the  tribes  (vi^),  doubtless,  are  the  sacrifice, 
for  all  beings  are  ranged  (vish/a)  -  under  the  sacri- 
fice ; — 'in  the  three  spheres  of  the  heavens,' — 
the  three  spheres  of  the  heavens,  doubtless,  are  the 
(three)  pressings  (of  Soma)  :  he  thus  means  the 
pressings.  With  an  anush/'ubh  verse  (he  performs 
this  rite),  for  the  Anush/ubh  is  speech,  and  speech 
(includes)  all  vital  airs  ;  and  by  means  of  speech, 
that  is  vital  air,  he  thus  makes  these  two  (bricks) 
continuous,  and  joins  them  together.  This  same 
Sudadohas,  whilst  being  a  single  (verse),  extends 
over  all  the  bricks,  whence — the  Sudadohas  being 
the  vital  air — this  vital  air,  whilst  being  one  only, 
extends  over  all  the  limbs,  over  the  whole  body. 

Fourth  Brahmaa^a. 

1.  On  the  (three)  naturally-perforated  (bricks) 
he  (the  Sacrificer)  sings  samans  ;  for  the  naturally- 
perforated  ones  are  these  (three)  worlds  ;  and  they 

'  Part  iii,  p.  307,  note  2,  the  following  translation  of  this 
difficult  and  obscure  verse  was  proposed  :  — '  At  his  birth  the  well- 
like milking,  speckled  ones  mix  the  Soma  (draught),  the  clans  of 
the  gods  in  the  three  spheres  of  the  heavens.' 

^  Literally,  have  entered,  or  settled.  At  XIV,  8,  13,  3,  the  same 
etymological  word-play  occurs,  only  '  food  (anne)  '  being  substituted 
for  '  sacrifice  (ya^;7e)  ' ;  where  the  St.  Petersb.  Diet,  takes  '  vish/a  ' 
in  the  sense  of  'entered,  i.e.  contained.' 


VIII    KANDA,    7    ADHYAYA,    4    BRAlIMAiVA,    6.        I45 


are  just  these  (ordinary)  stones.  The  gods,  having 
laid  them  down,  saw  them  as  such  :  that. they  were 
dry  stones. 

2.  They  spake,  '  Think  ye  upon  this,  how  we 
may  lay  sap,  the  means  of  subsistence,  into  these 
worlds  !  '  They  spake,  '  Meditate  ye  ! '  whereby, 
doubtless,  they  meant  to  say,  'Seek  ye  a  layer! 
seek  ye  how  we  may  lay  sap,  the  means  of  sub- 
sistence,  into  these  worlds  ! ' 

3.  Whilst  meditating,  they  saw  these  samans 
(hymn-tunes),  and  sang  them ;  and  by  means  of 
them  they  laid  sap,  the  means  of  subsistence,  into 
these  worlds;  and  in  like  manner  does  the  Sacrificer 
now,  when  he  sings  these  samans,  lav  sap,  the 
means  of  subsistence,   into  these  worlds. 

4.  Over  the  naturally-perforated  ones  he  sings 
them :  the  naturally-perforated  ones  being  these 
worlds,  it  is  into  these  worlds  that  he  thereby  lays 
sap,  the  means  of  subsistence. 

5.  He  sings  (the  tunes)  on  the  (mystic)  words 
'Bhus,  Bhuvas,  Svar'; — bhus  (earth),  doubtless, 
is  this  world,  bhuvas  is  the  air-world,  and  svar 
(light)  is  yonder  world  :  into  these  worlds  he 
thereby  lays  sap,  the  means  of  subsistence. 

6.  They  have  different  preludes,  and  the  same 
finale^ ;  and  as  to  their  having  different  preludes,  it 

'  These  hymn-lunes  are  given,  Sam.  Ved.  V,  p.  487,  in  the  way 
in  which  they  are  liere  to  be  chanted.  They  consist  entirely  of  the 
respective  words,  separated  four  times  by  musical  interjections 
(stobhas)  inserted  between  them,  ending  with  the  common  finale : 
thus,  ( I )  l)luV/-bhu/i-hoyi-bhu//-ho}i-bhu/i-ha~uva~e-suvar^yo- 
ti-;^ ;     (2)    l)huva/i-bhuva//-hoyi-bhuva//-ha~uva~e-suvar^yoti-//; 

( 3 )  suva//-suva/^-hoyi-suva//-hoyi-suva/2-ha~uva~e-suvar^yotf-//. 
Along  with  these,  as  to  be  chanted  on  the  same  model,  are  given, 

(4)  the  '  satyaw  saman,'  beginning  '  satyam-satyam-hoyi '  &c.,  and 

[43]  L 


146  5'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

is  because  they  (the  gods)  saw  them  separately ; 
and  as  to  their  having  the  same  finale  (nidhana),  it 
is  because  there  is  only  one  foundation,  only  one 
finale  to  the  sacrifice — even  heaven  :  therefore  they 
have  *  svar-,fyotis  (heaven-light) '  for  their  finale. 

7.  He  then  bestrews  him  (Agni,  the  fire-altar  and 
Agni's  body)  with  chips  of  gold.  Now  that  whole 
Agni  had  been  completed,  and  the  gods  bestowed 
on  him  immortality,  that  highest  form  ;  and  in  like 
manner  does  this  one  now  bestow  upon  him  that 
highest,  immortal  form  ^ 

8.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  bestrews  him  with 
chips  of  gold.  Now  on  that  former  occasion  he 
first  lays  into  him  that  pleasing  form,  the  gold 
plate  and  the  (gold)  man  ^ ;  and  he  now  decks  him 
all  over  with  a  pleasing  form. 

9.  With  two  hundred  (chips  he  bestrews  him) 
each  time, — two-footed  is  the  Sacrificer,  and  Agni 


(5)  the  '  purusha-saman,' beginning  '  purusha-^-purusha-hoyi '  &c.; 
which  are  similarly  chanted  by  the  Sacrificer  at  the  beginning  of 
the  first  layer,  when  laying  down  the  lotus  leaf  (part  iii,  p.  363, 
where  note  i  should  be  corrected  in  accordance  with  the  present 
note),  and  the  gold  man  (ib.  p.  369,  where  the  note  requires 
likewise  to  be  corrected),  as  the  '  X-itre  gayati,'  '  he  sings  on  the 
bright  one,'  of  the  text  cannot  refer  to  the  '  A'itra-saman  '  there 
referred  to.  Cf.  La/y.  S.  I,  5,  8. — In  regard  to  these  samans  (hymn- 
verses),  the  text  might  lead  one  to  suppose  that  they  only  consist 
of  two,  instead  of  the  usual  four  parts  (omitting  the  intermediate 
Udgitha  and  Pratihara,  cf.  part  ii,  p.  310  note).  The  saman 
being,  however,  sung  by  the  Sacrificer  himself,  the  usual  distinction 
into  parts  to  be  performed  by  different  chanters  was  probably 
dispensed  with. 

'  That  is,  the  Sacrificer  bestows  it  on  Agni ;  with  probably, 
however,  the  double  entente, '  this  Adhvaryu  priest  bestows  it  on  the 
Sacrificer.' 

^  See  VII,  4,  I,  10  seq. ;  15  seq. 


VIII    KAATDA,    7    ADHYAYA,    4    BRAHMAiVA,    12.       I47 


is  the  sacrificer :  as  great  as  Agni  is,  as  great  as  is 
his  measure,  with  so  much  he  thus  bestows  upon 
him  immortahty,  that  highest  form.  Five  times 
(he  strews), — five-layered  is  the  altar,  five  seasons 
make  a  year,  and  Agni  is  the  year :  as  great  as 
Agni  is,  as  great  as  is  his  measure,  with  so  much 
he  thus  bestows  upon  him  immortality,  that  highest 
form.  With  a  thousand  (chips  he  bestrews  him), — a 
thousand  means  everything  :  with  everything  he  thus 
confers  upon  him  immortality,  that  highest  form. 

10.  First  (he  scatters  them)  at  the  back  whilst 
standing  with  his  face  towards  the  east ;  then  on 
the  left  (north)  side  towards  the  south ;  then  in 
front  whilst  facing  the  west ;  then,  having  gone 
round  the  back,  from  the  south  whilst  facinof  the 
north  :  this  is  from  left  to  right  (sunwise),  for  that 
is  (the  way)  with  the  gods.  Then,  having  gone 
round,  (he  scatters  chips)  at  the  back  whilst 
standing  with  his  face  to  the  east,  for  in  this  way 
that  former  performance  of  him  ^  took  place. 

11.  [He  scatters,  with,  Va^.  S.  XV,  65],  'The 
fore-measure  of  a  thousand  thou  art, — The 
counter-measure  of  a  thousand  thou  art, — 
The  up-measure  of  a  thousand  thou  art, — 
The  thousandfold  thou  art, — For  a  thousand 
thee!' — a  thousand,  doubtless,  means  everything: 
thus,  'Everything  thou  art, — thee  for  everything!' 

12.  Now,  then,  the  consideration  of  the  layer- 
fillings.  The  first  layer  is  this  (terrestrial)  world  ; 
and    the    filling    of    soil    means    cattle :     thus,    in 


^  Viz.  of  Agni  (and  the  Sacrificer).  The  ceremony  alluded  to 
was  the  fivefold  libation  of  ghee  offered  on  the  gold  man 
(representing  Agni  and  the  Sacrificer),  see  VII,  4,  i,  34-35. 

L   2 


148  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

covering   the   first    layer  with   a   filling   of  soil    he 
covers  this  (terrestrial)  world  with  cattle. 

13.  The  second  layer  is  the  air,  and  the  filling  of 
soil  means  birds  :  thus,  in  covering  the  second  layer 
with  a  filling  of  soil,  he  covers  (fills)  the  air  with 
birds. 

14.  The  third  layer  is  the  sky,  and  the  filling  of 
soil  means  stars  ;  thus,  in  covering  the  third  layer 
with  a  filling  of  soil,  he  covers  the  sky  with  stars. 

15.  The  fourth  layer  is  the  sacrifice,  and  the 
filling  of  soil  means  sacrificial  gifts  :  thus,  in  covering 
the  fourth  layer  with  a  filling  of  soil,  he  covers  the 
sacrifice  with  sacrificial  gifts  (to  the  priests). 

16.  The  fifth  layer  is  the  Sacrificer,  and  the 
filling  of  soil  means  progeny  (or  subjects) :  thus, 
in  covering  the  fifth  layer  with  a  filling  of  soil,  he 
covers  (abundantly  supplies)  the  Sacrificer  with  pro- 
geny (or  subjects). 

17.  The  sixth  layer  is  the  heavenly  world,  and 
the  filling  of  soil  means  the  gods  :  thus  in  covering 
the  sixth  layer  with  a  filling  of  soil,  he  fills  the 
heavenly  world  with  gods. 

18.  The  seventh  layer  is  immortality, — that  is 
the  last  (layer)  he  lays  down,  and  thus  bestows  im- 
mortality as  the  highest  thing  of  all  this  (universe) : 
therefore  immortality  is  the  highest  thing  of  all  this 
(universe) ;  therefore  the  gods  are  not  separated 
therefrom  ;  and  therefore  they  are  immortal.  Thus 
much  as  to  the  deity  ^ 

19.  Now,  as  to  the  Self  (body).  The  first  layer 
is  the  legs,  and  the  downward  flowing  vital  air ;  and 


'   That  is,  so  much  as  to  the  objects  to  which  the  difterent  parts 
of  the  altar  are  sacred  or  dedicated. 


VIII    KAA^DA,    7    ADHYAYA,    4    BRAHMAiVA,    2T.       1 49 

the  filling  of  soil  is  the  flesh :  thus,  in  covering  the 
first  layer  with  a  filling  of  soil,  he  covers  that  (part) 
of  his  (Agni's)  body  with  flesh.  [He  does  so]  after 
laying  down  bricks,  and  bricks  mean  bone  :  he  thus 
covers  the  bone  with  flesh.  He  does  not  cover  (the 
altar-site)  below  (the  first  layer),  whence  these  vital 
airs  are  not  closed  up  below ;  but  he  covers  it 
above,  and  thereby  covers  that  (part)  of  his  body 
above  with  flesh  ;  and  hence  that  (part)  of  his  body 
above,  being  covered  with  flesh,  is  not  visible. 

20.  The  second  layer  is  that  (part  of  the  body) 
which  is  above  the  legs  and  below  the  waist ;  and 
the  filling  of  soil  is  flesh :  thus,  in  covering  the 
second  layer  with  a  filling  of  soil,  he  covers  that 
(part)  of  his  body  with  flesh.  [He  does  so]  after 
laying  down  bricks,  and  bricks  mean  bone  :  he  thus 
covers  the  bone  with  flesh.  He  places  them  on 
a  filline  of  soil,  and  covers  them  with  a  fillino;^  of 
soil :  he  thus  covers  that  (part)  of  his  body  on  both 
sides  with  flesh  ;  whence  that  part  of  his  body,  being 
on  both  sides  covered  with  flesh,  is  not  visible. 

21.  The  third  layer  is  the  waist  itself;  the  fourth 
layer  is  that  (part  of  the  body)  which  is  above  the 
waist  and  below  the  neck ;  the  fifth  layer  is  the 
neck,  the  sixth  layer  is  the  head,  and  the  seventh 
layer  is  the  vital  airs.  This  he  lays  down  as  the 
last  (or  highest)  :  he  thus  makes  the  vital  airs  the 
highest  of  all  this  (universe),  and  hence  the  vital 
airs  are  the  highest  thing  of  all  this  (universe).  He 
places  it  on  a  filling  of  soil ;  and  the  filling  of  soil 
means  flesh  ;  he  thus  covers  (the  channels  of)  the 
vital  airs  with  flesh.  He  does  not  cover  it  above, 
whence  these  (channels  of  the)  vital  airs  are  not 
closed  up  above. 


I  ^O  ^'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 


NINTH    KANDA. 

THE  BUILDING  OF  THE  SACRED  FIRE-ALTAR 

(continued). 


^'ATARUDRIYA    LUSTRATION,    INSTALMENT    AND 
CONSECRATION  OF  FIRE,  AND  SOMA-SACRIFICE. 

First  Adhyaya.     First  BRAHMAiVA. 

The  .Satarudriya. 

This  solemn  and  awful  ceremony  consists  of  425  oblations  to 
Rudra,  the  representative  of  the  fearful  aspects  of  life  and  nature, 
accompanied  by  appropriate  formulas  addressed  to  the  various 
forms  of  the  terrible  god,  and  his  associates,  with  a  view  to  appeas- 
ing their  wrath.  These  formulas  make  up  a  complete  kaw^a  (XVI) 
of  the  Va^asaneyi-sawhita,  and  constitute  a  special  Upanishad. 
Though  only  a  few  of  the  formulas  are  actually  referred  to  in  the 
text  of  the  Brahma/za,  the  different  portions  of  which  this  dismal 
litany  consists  are  otherwise  alluded  to,  and  for  this  reason,  as  well 
as  on  account  of  its  intrinsic  interest,  as  doubtless  reflecting,  to 
a  considerable  extent,  the  popular  belief  in  demoniac  agencies 
to  which  man  is  constantly  exposed,  a  complete  translation  of 
the  ^Satarudriya  formulas  is  here  given.  For  a  German  translation 
of  the  Taittiriya  recension  of  the  text,  with  the  various  readings 
of  the  Kanaka  and  Va^asaneyin  versions,  see  A.Weber,  Ind.  Stifd. 
II,  p.  14  seqq. 

I.  I.  Reverence,  O  Rudra,  be  to  thy  wrath;  and  to  thine  arrow 
be  reverence;  and  to  both  thine  arms  be  reverence!  2.  What 
auspicious  form  there  is  of  thine,  free  from  terror  and  boding  of 
evil,  with  that  most  propitious  form  look  down  upon  us,  O  moun- 
tain-dweller !  3.  The  shaft  thou  bearest  in  thy  hand  to  hurl, 
O  mountain-dweller,  make  it  harmless,  O  protector  of  mountains, 
injure  not  man  nor  beast  I  4.  With  auspicious  speech  we  call  upon 
thee,  O  mountain-dweller,  that  all  these  living  beings  of  ours  may 


IX   KAiVDA,     I     ADIIYAYA,     I    BRAHMAA^A.  1  5  [ 

be  healthy  and  of  good  cheer !  5.  May  he  plead  for  us  as  our 
intercessor,  the  first  divine  i)hysician :  crushing  all  serpents,  turn 
thou  aside  all  practices  of  witchcraft !  6.  That  tawny  one,  and  the 
ruddy  and  the  brown  one,  the  auspicious — the  Rudras  that  hover 
around  him  by  thousands  in  the  quarters :  their  wrath  do  we 
deprecate.  7.  That  one  who  glideth  downwards  (the  sun)  blood- 
red  and  blue-necked — the  cowherds  have  seen  him  and  the  water- 
bearers  (f.  the  clouds)  have  seen  him — be  he  gracious  unto  us,  when 
seen  !  8.  Reverence  be  to  the  blue-necked,  thousand-eyed  showerer ; 
and  what  henchmen  there  are  of  his,  to  them  do  I  render  homage. 
9.  Loose  thou  the  string  from  the  ends  of  thy  bow  ;  and  cast  away 
the  arrows  in  thy  hand,  O  holy  one!  10.  Stringless  be  the  bow 
of  the  coil-braided  one,  and  arrowless  his  quiver !  may  his  arrows 
be  futile,  and  empty  his  scabbard!  11.  With  that  plague-repelling 
weapon  in  thy  hand,  with  thy  bow,  protect  us,  O  best  of  showerers, 
on  all  sides !  12,  May  the  shaft  of  thy  bow  spare  us  on  all  sides, 
and  far  from  us  lay  down  that  quiver  of  thine  !  13.  Unstringing 
the  bow,  and  breaking  off  the  points  of  thy  shafts,  be  thou  gracious 
and  well-disposed  unto  us,  O  thousand-eyed  lord  of  a  hundred 
quivers  !  14.  Reverence  be  to  thine  unstrung  weapon,  the  powerful 
one  ;  and  reverence  be  to  thine  arms  and  to  thy  bow  !  15.  Neither 
our  full-grown,  nor  our  little  one,  neither  the  virile,  nor  the  unborn, 
neither  our  father  strike  thou,  nor  our  mother :  harm  not  our  dear 
bodies,  O  Rudra!  16.  Neither  to  our  children,  and  our  children's 
children,  nor  to  our  life,  neither  to  our  kine  nor  to  our  horses  do 
thou  injury  !  smite  not  our  shining  warriors  :  with  offering  we  ever 
invoke  thee,  O  Rudra  1 

II.  17.  Reverence  be  to  the  golden-armed  leader  of  hosts,  and 
to  the  lord  of  regions  be  reverence  !  reverence  be  to  the  green-haired 
trees,  and  to  the  lord  of  beasts  be  reverence  I  reverence  be  to  the 
grass-hued  shining  one,  and  to  the  lord  of  roads  be  reverence ! 
reverence  be  to  the  gold-locked  wearer  of  the  sacred  cord,  and  to 
the  lord  of  the  strong-bodied  be  reverence!  18.  Reverence  be  to 
the  dusky  smiter,  and  to  the  lord  of  food  be  reverence !  reverence 
be  to  Bhava's  weapon,  and  to  the  lord  of  moving  creatures  be 
reverence !  reverence  be  to  the  strung-bowed  Rudra,  and  to  the 
lord  of  fields  be  reverence  !  reverence  be  to  the  inviolable  charioteer, 
and  to  the  lord  of  forests  be  reverence  !  19.  Reverence  be  to  the 
ruddy  architect,  and  to  the  lord  of  trees  be  reverence !  reverence 
be  to  the  ubiquitous  producer  of  wealth,  and  to  the  lord  of  plants 
be  reverence  !  reverence  be  to  the  wise  merchant,  and  to  the  lord  of 
forest  retreats  be  reverence  !    reverence  be  to  the  loud-noised  crier, 


152  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

and  to  the  lord  of  wanderers  be  reverence!  20.  Reverence  be  to 
the  onward-rushing  one  with  his  (weapon)  levelled  everywhere,  and 
to  the  lord  of  beings  be  reverence  !  reverence  be  to  the  victorious 
smiter,  and  to  the  lord  of  victorious  (hosts)  be  reverence  !  reverence 
be  to  the  matchless  swordsman,  and  to  the  lord  of  thieves  be  rever- 
ence !  reverence  be  to  the  prowling  rover,  and  to  the  lord  of  the 
forest  be  reverence  !  21.  Reverence  be  to  the  tricking  arch-trickster, 
and  to  the  lord  of  pilferers  be  reverence  !  reverence  be  to  the  well- 
quivered  swordsman,  and  to  the  lord  of  robbers  be  reverence ! 
reverence  be  to  the  slaying  spearmen,  and  to  the  lord  of  pillagers 
be  reverence !  reverence  be  to  the  night-walking  sword-wielders, 
and  to  the  lord  of  cut-throats  be  reverence ! 

III.  22.  Reverence  be  to  the  turbaned  mountaineer,  and  to  the 
lord  of  spoilers  be  reverence  !  reverence  be  to  shooters  of  arrows,  and 
to  ye  bowmen  be  reverence  1  reverence  be  to  the  bow-stretching,  and 
to  ye  that  fix  the  arrow  be  reverence !    reverence  be  to  ye  that  pull 
(the  bow),  and  to  ye  that  hurl  be  reverence!     23.  Reverence  be  to 
ye  that  shoot,  and  to  ye  that  pierce  be  reverence !   reverence  be 
to  ye  that  sleep,  and  to  ye  that  wake  be  reverence !   reverence  be  to 
ye,  the  lying,  and  to  ye,  the  sitting,  be  reverence !    reverence  be 
to  ye,  the  standing,  and  to  ye,  the  running,  be  reverence !     24. 
Reverence  be  to  gatherings,  and  to  ye,  lords  of  the   gathering, 
be    reverence  I     reverence  be    to   horses,   and  to  ye,   masters   of 
horses,  be  reverence !   reverence  be  to  the  victorious  (armies),  and 
to  ye  that  smite  be  reverence !   reverence  be  to  the  serried  (hosts), 
and  to  ye  that  crush  be  reverence!     25.    Reverence  be  to  the 
troops,  and  to  ye,  chiefs  of  troops,  be  reverence !    reverence  be  to 
the  bands,  and  to  ye,  chiefs  of  bands,  be  reverence  !    reverence  be 
to  sharpers,  and  to  ye,  chiefs  of  sharpers,  be  reverence  !   reverence 
be   to   the  unshapen,   and   to  ye,   the  all-shaped,  be   reverence ! 
26.    Reverence  be  to  armies,  and  to  ye,   leaders  of  armies,  be 
reverence !    reverence  be  to  chariot-fighters,  and  to  ye,  the  chariot- 
less,  be  reverence !  reverence  be  to  car- fighters,  and  to  ye,  charioteers, 
be  reverence!    reverence  be  to  the  adult,  and  to  ye,  children,  be 
reverence ! 

IV.  27.  Reverence  be  to  carpenters,  and  to  ye,  wheelwrights,  be 
reverence  !  reverence  be  to  potters,  and  to  ye,  blacksmiths,  be 
reverence  !  reverence  be  to  the  jungle  tribes,  and  to  ye,  fishermen, 
be  reverence  !  reverence  be  to  dog-keepers,  and  to  ye  huntsmen  be 
reverence!  28.  Reverence  be  to  dogs,  and  to  ye  masters  of  dogs 
be  reverence  !  reverence  be  to  Bhava  and  to  Rudra !  reverence  be 
to  -S'arva  and  to  Pa^upati  (lord  of  beasts) !  reverence  be  to  Nilagriva 


IX    KANDA,    T    ADHYAYA,     I     BRAHMAA^A.  1 53 

(ihe  blue-necked)  and  to  Siiik,vi//i^.  (the  white-throated)!  29. 
Reverence  be  to  him  of  the  coiled  hair  and  to  the  shaven-haired 
one !  reverence  be  to  the  thousand-eyed  and  to  the  hundred- 
bowed  one !  reverence  be  to  the  mountain-dweller  and  to  the 
bald  one !  reverence  be  to  the  chief  of  showerers  and  to  the 
arrow-shooter !  30.  Reverence  be  to  the  short  and  the  dwarfish 
one !  reverence  be  to  the  tall  and  the  old  one !  reverence  be  to  the 
full-grown  and  the  growing  one  I  reverence  be  to  the  topmost  anrl 
first  one!  31.  Reverence  be  to  the  swift  and  agile  one!  reverence 
be  to  the  fast  and  nimble  one  !  reverence  be  to  the  suriiins:  and 
roaring  one  !  reverence  be  to  the  river-dweller  and  the  isle-dweller  ! 

V.  32.  Reverence  be  to  the  eldest  and  to  the  youngest!  rever- 
ence be  to  the  firstborn  and  to  the  afterborn  !  reverence  be  to  the 
middlemost  and  to  the  abortive  (?)  one  !  reverence  be  to  the  hind- 
most and  to  the  bottommost  one  !  33.  Reverence  be  to  him  dwelling 
in  the  air-castles,  and  to  him  in  the  magic  cord-ring !  reverence 
be  to  him  who  is  in  Yama's  (death's)  power,  and  to  him  who 
liveth  in  safety  !  reverence  be  to  him  in  (the  height  of  his)  fame, 
and  to  him  who  is  at  his  end  I  reverence  be  to  him  on  the  tilled 
land,  and  to  him  on  the  threshing-floor  !  34.  Reverence  be  to  him 
dwelling  in  the  wood,  and  to  him  in  the  jungle  !  reverence  be  to 
the  sound  and  to  the  echo !  reverence  be  to  him  of  the  swift  armv, 
and  to  him  of  the  swift  chariot  !  reverence  be  to  the  hero  and  the 
shatterer !  35.  Reverence  be  to  the  helmeted  and  the  armoured 
one !  reverence  be  to  the  mailed  and  the  cuirassed  one  !  reverence 
be  to  the  famous  one,  anil  to  the  leader  of  the  famous  army  ! 
reverence  be  to  hmi  dwelling  in  the  drum,  and  to  him  in  the  drum- 
stick !  36.  Reverence  be  to  the  bold,  and  the  deliberate  one ! 
reverence  be  to  the  swordsman,  and  to  the  quiver-bearer !  rever- 
ence be  to  the  sharp-shafted  and  the  armed  one  !  reverence  be  to 
the  well-armed  one,  and  to  the  wielder  of  a  goodly  l)ow  ! 

VI.  37.  Reverence  be  to  him  dwelling  in  the  stream,  and  to  him 
on  the  road  !  reverence  be  to  him  in  the  mere  (?),  and  to  him  in  the 
pool  !  reverence  be  to  him  in  the  ditch,  and  to  him  in  the  lake  ! 
reverence  be  to  him  in  the  river,  and  to  him  in  the  pond !  38. 
Reverence  be  to  liim  dwelling  in  the  well,  and  to  him  in  the  bank  ! 
reverence  be  to  him  in  the  clouded  sky  (.?),  and  to  him  in  the  heat 
of  the  sun !  reverence  be  to  him  in  the  cloud,  and  to  him  in  the- 
lightning!  reverence  be  to  him  in  the  rain,  and  to  him  in  the 
drought  !  39.  Reverence  be  to  him  dwelling  in  tiie  wind,  and  to 
him  in  the  storm-cloud  (.'') !  reverence  be  to  him  dwelling  in  the 
house,  and  to  the  guardian  of  the  house  !   reverence  be  to  Soma 


154  i-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

and  Rudra !  reverence  be  to  the  dusky  and  the  ruddy  one !  40. 
Reverence  be  to  the  propitious  one,  and  to  the  lord  of  beasts ! 
reverence  be  to  the  terrible  and  fearful  one !  reverence  be  to  the 
near-hitter  and  the  far-hitter !  reverence  be  to  the  slayer  and  the 
slaughterer !  reverence  be  to  the  gold-haired  trees !  reverence  be 
to  the  deliverer ! 

VII.  41.  Reverence  be  to  the  gentle  and  the  friendly  one! 
reverence  be  to  the  peaceful  and  pleasing  one !  reverence  be  to  the 
kindly  and  the  kindliest! 

VIII.  42.  Reverence  be  to  him  who  is  on  the  further  shore,  and 
to  him  on  the  near  shore  !  reverence  be  to  him  who  ferrieth  over,  and 
to  him  who  bringeth  ashore !  reverence  be  to  him  dwelling  in  the 
ford,  and  to  him  on  the  bank !  reverence  be  to  him  dwelling  in 
the  sward,  and  to  him  in  the  foam  !  43.  Reverence  be  to  him 
dwelling  in  the  sand,  and  to  him  in  the  current !  reverence  be  to 
him  dwelling  in  the  stony  and  to  him  in  habitable  places  !  reverence 
be  to  the  coil-haired  and  to  the  straight-haired  (?)  one  !  reverence  be 
to  him  dwelling  in  barren  land,  and  to  him  on  the  beaten  track ! 
44.  Reverence  be  to  him  dwelling  in  the  cow-pen,  and  to  him  in 
the  cattle-shed !  reverence  be  to  him  dwelling  in  the  couch,  and  to 
him  in  the  house !  reverence  be  to  him  dwelling  in  the  heart,  and 
to  him  in  the  whirlpool !  reverence  be  to  him  dwelling  in  the  well, 
and  to  him  in  the  abyss !  45.  Reverence  be  to  him  dwelling  in 
what  is  dried  up,  and  to  him  in  what  is  green !  reverence  be  to  him 
dwelling  in  the  dust,  and  to  him  in  the  mist !  reverence  be  to  him 
dwelling  in  the  copse,  and  to  him  in  the  shrub !  reverence  be  to 
him  in  the  ground,  and  to  him  in  the  gully !  46.  Reverence  be 
to  him  dwelling  in  the  leaf,  and  to  him  in  the  leaf-fall  (sere  leaf) ! 
reverence  be  to  the  growler,  and  to  the  smiter !  reverence  be  to  the 
snatcher,  and  to  the  repeller  (?) !  reverence  be  to  the  arrow-makers, 
and  to  ye  bow-makers! — Reverence  be  to  ye,  the  sparkling  hearts 
of  the  gods !  reverence  be  to  the  discriminating,  reverence  to  the 
destructive,  reverence  to  the  irremovable ! 

IX.  47.  Chaser,  lord  of  the  (Soma)  plant !  blue-red  cleaver  !  fright 
and  hurt  not  these  people  and  these  cattle :  let  none  of  us  sicken ! 
48.  These  prayers  we  bring  before  the  mighty  Rudra,  the  coil- 
braided  smiter  of  heroes,  that  there  may  be  safety  for  the  two-footed 
and  the  four-footed,  and  that  everything  in  this  village  may  be 
healthy  and  thriving.  49.  That  friendly  form  of  thine,  O  Rudra, 
friendly  and  ever  healing,  friendly  and  healing  to  the  stricken : 
therewith  be  gracious  unto  us  that  we  may  live !  50.  I\Iay  the 
shaft  of  Rudra  spare  us,  and  the  ill-will  of  the  violent  and  malevo- 


TX    KAA^DA,     I    ADHYAYA,    I    BRAHMAiVA.  1 55 

lent  one  :  unstring  the  strong  (bow)  from  (hurting)  our  patrons, 
O  showerer  (of  gifts),  and  be  gracious  unto  our  children  and  our 
children's  children  !  51.  Be  thou  kindly  and  well-disposed  towards 
us,  O  kindliest  chief  of  showerers,  lay  down  thy  weapon  on  the 
highest  tree,  and  putting  on  the  hide  come  and  join  us,  bearing 
the  spear!  52.  O  blood-red  scatterer,  reverence  be  unto  thee,  holy 
one,  let  those  thousand  shafts  of  thine  lay  low  another  than  us  ! 
53.  The  thousandfold  thousand  shafts  of  thine  arms — turn  thou 
away  their  heads  from  us,  O  holy  lord  !  54.  What  countless  thou- 
sands of  Rudras  there  are  upon  earth,  their  bows  do  we  unstring 
(and  cast  away)  at  a  thousand  leagues.  55.  The  Bhavas  in  this 
great  sea,  the  air :  their  bows  do  we  unstring  at  a  thousand  leagues. 
56.  The  blue-necked,  white-throated  Rudras  seated  in  the  sky : 
their  bows  do  we  unstring  at  a  thousand  leagues.  57.  The  blue- 
necked,  white-throated  6'arvas  dwelling  below  the  earth  :  their  bows 
do  we  unstring  at  a  thousand  leagues.  58.  The  grass-green  in  the 
trees,  the  blue-necked,  blood-red  ones :  their  bows  do  we  unstring 
at  a  thousand  leagues.  59.  They  who  are  the  chiefs  of  spirits, 
hairless  and  coil-braided  :  their  bows  do  we  unstring  at  a  thousand 
leagues.  60.  They  who  are  the  guardians  of  roads,  food-bearers, 
life-fighters  (.'') :  their  bows  do  we  unstring  at  a  thousand  leagues. 
61.  They  who  haunt  the  bathing-places,  wielders  of  spear  and 
sword :  their  bows  do  we  unstring  at  a  thousand  leagues.  62. 
They  who  strike  men  at  their  meals,  and  in  their  cups  those  that 
drink  :  their  bows  do  we  unstring  at  a  thousand  leagues.  63.  What 
Rudras  are  scattered  over  the  regions,  so  many  and  more :  their 
bows  do  we  unstring  at  a  thousand  leagues. — 64.  Reverence  be  to 
the  Rudras  dwelling  in  the  sky,  whose  arrows  the  rain  is !  to  them 
(I  stretch)  ten  (fingers)  eastward,  ten  southward,  ten  westward,  ten 
northward,  ten  upward :  to  them  be  reverence  1  may  they  be 
gracious  unto  us  and  help  us :  whomsoever  we  hate,  and  w^hoso- 
ever  hateth  us,  him  we  cast  into  their  jaws !  65.  Reverence  be  to 
the  Rudras  dwelling  in  the  air,  whose  arrows  the  wind  is !  to  them 
(I  stretch)  ten  (fingers)  eastward,  ten  southward,  ten  westward,  ten 
northward,  ten  upward  :  to  them  be  reverence  !  may  they  be  gracious 
unto  us  and  help  us :  whomsoever  we  hate,  and  whosoever  hateth 
us,  him  we  cast  into  their  jaws !  66.  Reverence  be  to  the  Rudras 
dwelling  upon  earth,  whose  arrows  food  is  1  to  them  (I  stretch)  ten 
(fingers)  eastward,  ten  southward,  ten  westward,  ten  northward, 
ten  upward :  to  them  be  reverence  !  may  they  be  gracious  unto  us 
and  help  us :  whomsoever  we  hate,  and  whosoever  hateih  us,  him 
we  cast  into  their  jaws ! 


156  5ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

1.  He  then  performs  the  ^'atarudriya  offering ! 
This  whole  Agni  has  now  ^  been  completed :  he 
now  is  the  deity  Rudra.  Upon  him  the  gods 
bestowed  that  highest  form,  immortality.  Flaming 
he  there  stood  longing  for  food.  The  gods  were 
afraid  of  him  lest  he  should  hurt  them. 

2.  They  spake,  '  Let  us  gather  together  food  for 
him :  therewith  we  will  appease  him  ! '  They 
gathered  for  him  that  food,  the  ^Santadevatya  ^,  and 
thereby  appeased  him ;  and  inasmuch  as  they 
thereby  appeased  (^am)  the  god  (deva),  it  is  called 
^'antadevatya ;— ^'antadevatya,  doubtless,  is  here 
called  mystically  '  ^'atarudriya  ^,'  for  the  gods  love 
the  mystic.  And  in  like  manner  does  this  Sacri- 
ficer  now  bestow  upon  him  that  highest  form, 
immortality.  Flaming  he  there  stands,  longing  for 
food.  He  gathers  for  him  that  food,  the  .^'anta- 
devatya,  and  thereby  appeases  him. 

3.  He  offers  wild  sesamum  seeds.  He  (Agni) 
grows  when  he  is  being  built  up  :  he  grows  for 
(the  consumption)  of  every  kind  of  food.  And  wild 
sesamum  seeds  represent  both  kinds  of  food,  the 
cultivated  as  well  as  the  wild-orowinor :  inasmuch  as 
they  are  sesamum  seeds  they  are  a  cultivated  (kind 
of  food),  and  inasmuch  as  they  ripen  on  unploughed 
land  they  are  wild-growing ;  he  thus  satisfies  him 
with  both  kinds  of  food,  the  cultivated  as  well  as 
the  wild-orrowincr. 

^  Or,  here,  in  this  (atra),  in  the  shape  of  this  (altar)  on  which  the 
fire  is  to  be  deposited. 

-  That  is,  that  whereby  the  deity  is  propitiated  or  appeased. 

^  A  fanciful  etymology  of  ^ata-rudriya,  as  if  it  were  j-anta  (pro- 
pitiated) +  rudriya,  instead  of  '  that  which  relates  to  a  hundred 
Rudras';  of.  paragraph  7. 


IX    KANDA,    I    ADHVAYA,     I     BRAHMAJVA,    7.        I  57 

4.  He  offers  by  means  of  an  arka-leaf  ^ — the  Arka- 
tree  (Calotropis  gigantea)  is  food  :  he  thus  gratifies 
him  with  food. 

5.  He  offers  on  (three)  enclosing-stones: — these 
enclosing-stones  are  the  (three)  Agnis  ;  and  thus  it 
is  over  Agni  himself  that  these  oblations  of  his 
become  offered. 

6.  And  as  to  why  he  performs  the  ^'atarudriya 
offering.  When  Pra^apati  had  become  disjointed, 
the  deities  departed  from  him.  Only  one  god  did 
not  leave  him,  to  wit,  Manyu  (wrath)  :  extended  he 
remained  within.  He  (Pra^apati)  cried,  and  the 
tears  of  him  that  fell  down  settled  on  Manyu.  He 
became  the  hundred-headed,  thousand-eyed,  hundred- 
quivered  Rudra.  And  the  other  drops  that  fell 
down,  spread  over  these  worlds  in  countless  num- 
bers, by  thousands  ;  and  inasmuch  as  they  originated 
from  crying  (rud),  they  w^ere  called  Rudras  (roarers). 
That  hundred-headed,  thousand-eyed,  hundred-quiv- 
ered Rudra,  with  his  bow  strung,  and  his  arrow 
fitted  to  the  string,  was  inspiring  fear,  being  in  quest 
of  food.      The  sfods  were  afraid  of  him. 

7.  They  spake  unto  Pra^apati,  '  We  are  afraid  of 
this  one,  lest  he  should  hurt  us  ! '  He  spake,  '  Gather 
food  for  him,  and  appease  him  therewith  ! '  They 
gathered  for  him  that  food,  the  ^'atarudriya  (offering), 
and  thereby  appeased  him  ;  and  inasmuch  as  they 
thereby  appeased  (.Tam)  the  hundred-headed  (i^ata- 
^irsha)  Rudra,  it  is  called  ^ataj^irsharudrajamaniya, 
— and    i'atai'irsharudrai'amaniya,   doubtless,    is  what 

*  That  is  to  say,  the  leaf  is  used  in  lieu  of  the  ordinary  offering- 
spoon.  Whilst  making  continual  oblations  on  one  of  the  three 
stones  from  this  leaf,  held  in  his  right  hand,  the  priest  holds  a  piece 
of  arka  wood  in  his  left  hand.     Mahidh.  on  Va^.  S.  XVI,  i. 


158  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

they  mystically  call  ^'atarudriya,  for  the  gods  love 
the  mystic.  And  in  like  manner  does  this  (Sacrificer) 
now  gather  for  him  that  food,  the  ^'atarudriya,  and 
appease  him  thereby. 

8.  He  offers  gavedhuka  flour;  for  from  the  place 
where  that  deity  lay  disjointed,  gavedhuka  plants 
(coix  barbata)  sprang  forth  :  he  thus  gratifies  himi 
by  his  own  portion,  by  his  own  life-sap. 

9.  He  offers  by  means  of  an  arka-leaf ;  for  that 
tree  sprang  from  the  resting-place  of  that  god :  he 
thus  gratifies  him  by  his  own  portion,  by  his  own 
life-sap. 

10.  He  offers  on  (three)  enclosing-stones  \  for  the 
enclosing-stones  are  the  hair,  and  neither  poison  nor 
anything  else  injures  one  at  the  hair.  He  offers 
whilst  standing  on  the  left  (north)  side  of  Agni 
(the  altar),  with  his  face  to  the  north  ;  for  in  that 
region  lies  the  house  of  that  god  ^' :  it  is  thus  in  his 
own  region  that  he  gratifies  him,  in  his  own  region 
he  contents  him  with  offering. 

1 1.  The  first  Svaha  ('  hail ')  he  utters  on  the 
knee-high  one, — what  is  knee-high  is,  as  it  were, 
below,  and  below,  as  it  were,  is  this  (terrestrial) 
world  :  he  thus  gratifies  those  Rudras  who  entered 
this  world. 

12.  Then  on  the  navel-high  one, — what  is  navel- 

^  The  site  of  the  altar  is  enclosed  within  a  continuous  line  of 
261  pariiTits,  about  half  a  foot  in  width,  running  along  its  edge. 
Their  height  is  indeterminate,  with  the  exception  of  three  of  them, 
dug  in  at  the  back  (west)  corner  of  the  left  wing,  of  which  one  is 
to  reach  up  to  the  knee,  the  second  up  to  the  navel,  and  the  third 
up  to  the  mouth  ;  each  of  the  latter  two  standing  to  the  left  (north) 
of  the  preceding  one. 

^  See  I,  7,  3,  20,  with  note.  Agni,  in  the  form  of  the  formidable 
Rudra  (who  is  to  be  kept  at  a  distance),  is  referred  to. 


IX    KANDA,    I    ADHYAYA,     I    BRAHMAiVA,    1 6.       1 59 

high  is,  as  it  were,  the  middle  ;  and  the  middle,  as 
it  were,  is  the  air-world :  he  thus  gratifies  those 
Rudras  who  entered  the  air-world. 

13.  Then  on  the  one  reaching  up  to  the  mouth, — 
what  reaches  up  to  the  mouth  is,  as  it  were,  above, 
and  above,  as  it  were,  is  yonder  world  :  he  thus 
gratifies  those  Rudras  who  entered  yonder  world. 
[He  does  so]  with  Svaha, — the  Svaha  is  food  :  with 
food  he  thus  gratifies  them. 

14.  [He  offers,  with,  Va^.  S.  XVI,  i],  'Rever- 
ence, O  Rudra,  be  to  thy  wrath!'  he  thereby 
does  reverence  to  that  wrath  which  remained  ex- 
tended within  him; — 'And  to  thine  arrow  be 
reverence,  and  to  both  thine  arms  be  rever- 
ence!' for  it  was  by  his  arrow  and  his  arms  that 
he  was  inspiring  fear. 

15.  That  god  who  became  the  hundred-headed 
(Rudra)  is  the  chief  (kshatra  ^),  and  those  others  who 
originated  from  the  drops  are  the  peasants  (clans- 
men) :  those  peasants  in  the  first  place  assigned 
to  that  chief  this  as  his  special  share,  to  wit,  this 
first  chapter  of  formulas  -,  and  gratified  him  thereby. 
And  in  like  manner  does  this  (Sacrificer)  now  assign 
this  to  him  as  his  special  fore-share,  and  gratify  him 
thereby.  Hence  this  (section)  is  addressed  to  a 
single  deity,  to  Rudra ;  for  it  is  him  he  thereby 
gratifies. 

16.  There  are  here  fourteen  formulas, — thirteen 
months  are  a  year,  and  Pra^apati  is  the  fourteenth  ; 


^  Literally,  the  ruling  power. 

^  The  first  anuvaka  of  kawr/a  XVI  of  the  Va^.  S.  consists  of 
sixteen  verses ;  which  of  these  the  fourteen  referred  to  in  the  next 
paragraph  are  is  not  clear  to  me. 


l6o  ^-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

and  Pra^'-apati  is  Agni  :  as  great  as  Agni  is,  as  great 
as  is  his  measure,  with  so  much  food  he  thus  gratifies 
him.  '  Reverence!  reverence!'  he  says; — reverence 
being  sacrifice,  it  is  by  sacrifice,  by  reverence,  that 
he  thus  reveres  him.  Therefore  he  must  not  men- 
tion any  one  unworthy  of  sacrifice,  for  it  would  be  just 
as  if  he  were  to  say  to  him,  '  Sacrifice  be  to  thee  ! ' 

17.  He  then  makes  offering  to  those  forming 
pairs  ^ :  '  Reverence  to  so  and  so  !  reverence  to  so  and 
so  ! '  It  is  as  if  he  were  to  say,  '  Thou,  N.  N.,  and 
this  one,  do  not  ye  two  injure  us  ! '  for  in  no  wise 
does  a  man  who  is  known  and  appealed  to  -  injure  us. 

18.  [Va^.  S.  XVI,  17],  'Reverence  be  to  the 
golden-armed  leader  of  hosts,  and  to  the  lord 
of  regions  be  reverence!'  for  he  (Rudra-Agni)  is 
indeed  the  golden-armed -Meader  of  hosts,  and  the 
lord  of  regions.  And  in  that  everything  in  this 
second  chapter  of  formulas  applies  to  one  and  the 
same  deity,  thereby  he  gratifies  that  (god  Rudra),  and 
makes  the  chief  to  have  a  share  in  the  people  (or 
the  clan)  :  hence  whatever  belongs  to  the  people'*,  in 
that  the  chieftain  has  a  share.  And  those  (Rudras) 
that  spread  over  these  worlds,  countless,  by  thou- 
sands ■^  they  are  the  deities  to  whom  he  now  offers. 

19.  He  thus  makes  offering  to  the  tribes  (of 
Rudras),  for  it  was  those  tribes,  those  Rudras,  that 
spread,  and  wheresoever  they  are  there  he  thereby 
gratifies  them.  And  thus,  indeed,  (he  gratifies) 
those  tribes  of  Rudras ;    and,  men  being  after  the 

'  That  is  from  Va^.  S.  XVI,  17  seqq. 

^  Or,  who  is  appealed  to  as  being  known  to  us,  i.e.  in  terms 
showing  that  he  is  known  to  us. 
^  That  is,  aureis  brachiis  instructus. 
*  Pm^aya  yad  dhanam  asti,  Say.  ^  See  paragraph  28. 


IX    KANDA,    I     ADHVAYA,    I     BRAHMAiVA,     23.        161 


manner  of  the  gods,   therefore  also  these  tribes  of 
men  :  tribe  after  tribe  he  thus  gratifies  them. 

20.  Now  some  of  these  (formulas)  have  'reverence' 
on  both  sides,  and  others  on  one  side  only  ; — more 
terrible  and  more  unappeased,  indeed,  are  those 
(Rudras)  that  have  'reverence'  on  both  sides:  on 
both  sides  he  thereby  appeases  them  by  sacrifice, 
by  reverence. 

21.  With  (each  set  of)  eighty  (formulas)  he  utters 
the  Svaha  \ — on  the  first  anuvaka,  and  on  eighty, 
and  on  eighty ;  and  the  formulas  which  follow  as 
far  as  the  '  unstringing '-formulas  (Va^.  S.  XVI, 
54-63), — eighties  -  mean  food  :  by  means  of  food  he 
thus  gratifies  them. 

22.  He  thus  mutters  these  formulas  (the  last  four 
of  Va^.  S.  XVI,  46),  '  Reverence  be  to  you,  the 
sparkling  (hearts  of  the  gods)  !'  for  this  is  his 
favourite  resort,  either  as  a  dear  son  or  the  heart : 
hence  whenever  he  should  be  in  fear  of  that  ood 
(Rudra),  let  him  offer  with  those  mystic  utterances, 
for  he  draws  nigh  unto  the  favourite  resort  of  that 
god,  and  so  that  god  does  not  injure  him. 

23.  'Reverence  be   to  you,   the  sparkling^' 

'  The  calculation  here,  as  so  often  in  regard  to  metres,  is  rather 
a  loose  one.  Anuvaka  I,  consisting  of  sixteen  verses,  is  taken  as 
amounting  to  the  first  fourscore  formulas  ;  anuvakas  II  and  III, 
consisting  of  ten  kawa^ikas  (each  of  which  is  calculated  to  consist 
of  eight  mantras),  constitute  the  second  fourscore ;  anuvakas  IV 
and  V  again  form  the  third  fourscore;  anuvakas  VI-VIII  (save 
the  last  four  formulas,  see  parag,  22),  the  (ourih  fourscore;  and 
from  there  to  the  '  unstringing  '-formulas,  that  is,  from  within  XVI, 
46  to  53,  the  fifth  fourscore.  At  the  end  of  each  eighty  formulas 
he  is  to  utter  one  Svaha  (sakm  svahakara/^.  Say.). 

*  An  etymological  play  on  the  word  '  aiiti,'  as  if  derived  from  as, 
to  eat. 

^  ?  Or,  scatterers,  sprinklers  (kirika),  root  kri.  The  author  of  the 
[43]  M 


1 62  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 


for  those  (Rudras)  produce  (kar)  everything  here, — 
'hearts  of  the  gods!' — Agni,  Vayu  and  Aditya 
(fire,  wind  and  sun),  these  truly  are  the  hearts  of  the 
gods; — 'Reverence  to  the  discriminating!' — 
for  those  (gods)  discriminate  everything  here ; — 
'Reverence  to  the  destructive!' — for  those 
(gods)  destroy  whom  they  wish  to  destroy; — 'Re- 
verence to  the  irremovable!' — for  those  (gods) 
are  not  (to  be)  removed  from  these  worlds. 

24.  He  then  mutters  those  that  follow  (Va^.  S. 
XVI,  47  seq.),  'Chaser!  lord  of  the  (Soma) 
plant!' — that  (god)  is  indeed  a  repeller,  for  he 
chases  away  whom  he  wishes  to  chase  away ; — 
'lord  of  the  plant' — that  is,  'lord  of  the  Soma- 
plant ;' — '  O  blue-red  cleaver^ ;' — these  are  names 
and  forms  of  him  :  he  thus  gratifies  him  by  calling 
him  by  his  names  ; — '  frighten  and  hurt  not  these 
people  and  these  cattle  !  letnoneofussicken!' 
as  the  text,  so  the  sense. 

25.  That  god  (Rudra)  is  the  kshatra  (ruling  power; 
chieftainship  or  chief) ;  and  for  that  chief  these 
peasants  set  apart  this  special  fore-share,  to  wit,  that 
first  section  (of  formulas) ;  and  now  he  (the  Sacrificer) 
sets  apart  for  him  that  after-share,  and  thereby 
gratifies  him  ;  and  hence  this  (section)  also  belongs 
to  a  single  deity,  to  wit,  to  Rudra ;  for  it  is  him  he 
thereby  gratifies. 

Biahmawa,  on  the  other  hand,  evidently  takes  it  in  the  sense  of 
'maker,  producer.' 

^  Thus  (' Zerspalter ')  daridra  is  probably  correctly  interpreted 
(from  root  '  dar,'  lo  split)  by  Prof.  Weber  ;  whilst  the  commentators 
take  it  in  its  ordinary  sense  of  'poor'  (i.e.  without  an  assistant, 
Mahidh.) ;  blue-red  Rudra  is  called  inasmuch  as  he  is  the  '  nila- 
kawMa '  blue-necked,  and  red  all  over  the  rest  of  his  body. 


IX    K\NDA,    I    ADHYAYA,     I     HRAHMAiVA,    30.        1 6, 


26.  These  are  seven  formulas, — of  seven  layers 
the  fire-altar  consists,  and  the  year  consists  of  seven 
months,  and  Agni  is  the  year :  as  great  as  Agni  is, 
as  great  as  is  his  measure,  by  so  much  food  he  thus 
gratifies  him.  These  two  kinds  (of  formulas)  amount 
to  twenty-one, — the  twelve  months,  the  five  seasons, 
these  three  worlds,  and  yonder  sun  as  the  twenty- 
first  (make  up)  this  amount. 

27.  He  then  offers  (the  libations  of  the)  'unstring- 
ingr'-formulas^  For  at  that  time  the  s^ods,  havincr 
gratified  those  (Rudras)  by  that  food,  unstrung  their 
bows  by  means  of  these  'unstringing'-formulas ; 
and  in  like  manner  this  (Sacrificer),  having  gratified 
them  by  that  food,  now  unstrings  their  bows  by  means 
of  these  'unstringing'-formulas;  for  with  an  unstrung 
bow  one  injures  no  one. 

28.  Here  now  he  says  'at  a  thousand  leagues,' 
for  a  thousand  leagues  is  the  farthest  distance  ;  and 
he  thus  unstrinofs  their  bows  at  what  is  the  farthest 
distance. 

29.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  says  'at  a  thousand 
leagues,' — a  thousand  leagues  means  this  Agni  (fire- 
altar),  for  neither  this  way  nor  that  way  is  there  any 
other  thine  ereater  than  he;  and  it  is  when  he  makes 
offering  in  the  fire  that  he  unstrings  their  bows  at 
a  thousand  leagues. 

30.  'Countless  thousands, — in  this  great 
sea,' — thus,  wheresover  they  are,  there  he  unstrings 
their  bows. 

^  Viz.  Va^.  S.  XVI,  54-63 :  '  What  countless  thousands  of 
Rudras  there  are  upon  earth,  their  bows  do  we  unstring  at  a 
thousand  leagues. — The  Bhavas  that  are  in  this  great  sea,  in  the 
air,  their  bow  do  we  unstring  at  a  thousand  leagues.'  Thus  each 
formula  ends  with  the  '  unstringing  '  refrain. 

M  2 


164  S'ATAPATHA-BRAHMATVA. 

31.  There  are  ten  of  these  'unstringing- '-offerings 
he  makes, — the  Vira^  consists  of  ten  syllables,  and 
Agni  is  Vira^  (widely-shining  or  ruling);  there  are 
ten  regions,  and  Agni  is  the  regions;  there  are  ten 
vital  airs,  and  Agni  is  the  vital  airs  :  as  great  as 
Agni  is,  as  great  as  is  his  measure,  by  so  much  he 
thus  unstrings  their  bows. 

32.  He  then  offers  the  descending^  (series  of  ob- 
lations). For  then  (in  the  preceding  oblations)  he 
ascends  these  worlds  upwards  from  hence :  this 
is,  as  it  were,  an  ascent  away  from  here.  But 
this  (earth)  is  a  firm  resting-place  :  the  gods 
returned  to  this  resting-place ;  and  in  like  manner 
does  the  Sacrificer  now  return  to  this  resting- 
place. 

2,2i-  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  descends.  Then 
(in  the  preceding  oblations)  he  goes  after  those 
(gods),  gratifying  (propitiating)  them.  From  thence 
he  now  recovers  his  own  self  unto  life;  and  so  does 
he  by  that  self  of  his  attain  all  vital  power. 

34.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  descends.  He  then 
(in  the  preceding  oblations)  gratifies  those  Rudras 
from  hence  upwards;  he  now  does  so  again  from 
thence  hitherwards. 

35.  [Vai,'-.  S.  XVI  64],  'Reverence  be  to  the 
Rudras  dwelling  in  the  sky,' — he  thereby  does 
reverence  to  those  Rudras  who  are  in  yonder  world ; 
— 'whose    arrows    the    rain    is,'    for    the    rain    is 


^  Va^.  S.  XVI,  64-66.  In  making  these  three  oblations  to  the 
Rudras  in  the  sky,  the  air,  and  on  earth  respectively,  the  procedure 
is  the  reverse  from  that  described  in  paragraphs  11-13,  viz.  first  on 
the  enclosing-slone  which  reaches  up  to  his  mouth,  then  on  that 
reaching  up  to  his  navel,  and  lastly  on  that  reaching  up  to  his 
knee. 


IX    KAA'DA,     I    ADHYAYA,     I     BRAHMAA^A,    39.        165 

indeed   their  arrows,   and    by   die   rain    they  injure 
whom  they  wish  to  injure. 

36.  [Va^.  S.  XVI,  65],  'Reverence  be  to  the 
Rudras  dwelling  in  the  air,' — he  thereby  does 
reverence  to  those  Rudras  who  are  in  the  air ; — 
'whose  arrows  the  wind  is,'  for  the  wind  is  indeed 
their  arrows,  and  by  the  wind  they  injure  whom  they 
wish  to  injure. 

37.  [Vaf.  S.  XVI,  66],  'Reverence  be  to  the 
Rudras  dwelling  upon  earth,' — he  thereby  does 
reverence  to  those  Rudras  who  are  in  this  (terres- 
trial) world ; — 'whose  arrows  food  is,'  for  food  is 
indeed  their  arrows,  and  by  means  of  food  they 
injure  whom  they  wish  to  injure. 

38.  'To  them  (I  stretch)  ten  (fingers)  forwards, 
ten  to  the  right,  ten  backwards,  ten  to  the  left, 
ten  upwards^' — of  ten  syllables  consists  the  Viraf, 
and  Agni  is  Vira^;  there  are  ten  seasons,  and  Agni 
is  the  seasons ;  there  are  ten  vital  airs,  and  Agni  is 
the  vital  airs  :  as  great  as  Agni  is,  as  great  as  is  his 
measure,  with  so  much  food  he  thus  gratifies  them. 

39.  And  as  to  why  he  says  '  ten-ten,'^ — there  are 
ten  fingers  in  the  joined  hands  ^ :  he  thus  makes 
reverence  to  them  in  each  direction;  and  hence  he 
who  is  frightened  places  his  hands  together  ; — 'To 
them  be  reverence!' — he  thus  does  reverence  to 
them; — 'May  they  be  gracious  unto  us!' — they 
thus  are  gracious  unto  him; — 'whomsoever  we 
hate,  and  whosoever  hateth  us,  him  we  cast 
into  their  jaws!' — thus   he  casts   into  their  jaws 


^  These  words,  as  well  as  the  spaced  words  in  the  next  paragraph, 
are  added  to  each  of  the  three  formulas  in  paragraphs  35-37- 

"^  The  joining  of  the  hollow  of  the  hands,  by  placing  the  tips  of 
the  fingers  together,  is  a  sign  of  reverence. 


1 66  DATAPATH  A-BR  A  HMAiVA. 


whomsoever  he  hates,  and  whosoever  hates  him. 
He  may  say,  'So-and-so  I  cast  into  their  jaws!' 
naming  him  whom  he  hates,  and  then  he  has  no 
longer  any  hold  upon  him.  But  let  him  take  no 
notice  of  this  (injunction),  for  indicated  of  himself 
is  he  whom  he  who  knows  this  hates. 

40.  In  three  turns  he  descends, — Agni  is  three- 
fold :  as  great  as  Agni  is,  as  great  as  is  his  measure, 
by  so  much  food  he  thus  gratifies  them.  With 
'Svaha'  (he  makes  offering),  for  the  Svaha  is  food: 
with  food  he  thus  gratifies  them.  Thrice  (in  three 
turns)  he  ascends  from  hence  upwards, — that  makes 
six:  the  significance  of  this  has  been  explained \ 

41.  And  as  to  why  he  descends  in  three  turns, — 
it  is  because  he  ascends  in  three  turns  :  thus  in  as 
many  turns  as  he  ascends,  in  so  many  turns  does  he 
descend. 

42.  He  then  throws  that  arka-leaf^  into  the  pit; 
for  it  is  therewith  that  he  performs  that  sacrificial 
work  sacred  to  Rudra,  and  that  same  (leaf)  is  inaus- 
picious ;  he  now  puts  it  away,  lest  any  one  should 
tread  on  this  inauspicious  (leaf),  and  suffer  injury 
thereby:  hence  (he  throws  it)  into  the  pit.  And, 
again,  as  to  why  (he  throws  it)  into  the  pit, — the  pit, 
doubtless,  means  the  fire,  and  thus  that  fire  consumes 
it.      Now  as  to  the  (symbolic)  correspondence. 

43.  As  to  this  they  say,  '  How  does  this  ►Sataru- 
driya  of  his  attain  to  (conformity  with)  the  year,  and 
Agni  ?    how    does    it    correspond    to    the    year,    to 

^  Of  objects  numbering  six,  the  seasons  commonly  occur,  e.  g. 

VI,  7,  I,  16. 

^  See  paragraph  4.  According  to  Katy.  ^Srautas.  18,  i,  6  both 
offering-utensils  (the  arka-leaf  and  the  arka-stick)  are  thrown  into 
the  pit. 


IX    KANDA,    I    ADHYAYA,     I    BRAHMAiVA,    44.        1 67 

Agni  ?'  Well,  this  ^'atarudriya  includes  three  hun- 
dred and  sixty  (formulas);  and  (other)  thirty,  and 
thirty-five.  Now,  as  to  the  three  hundred  and  sixty 
which  there  are,  so  many  are  there  days  in  the  year : 
thereby  it  obtains  the  days  of  the  year.  And  as  to  the 
thirty  (formulas)  which  there  are,  they  are  the  thirty 
nights  of  the  month  :  thereby  it  obtains  the  nights  of 
the  month  :  thus  it  obtains  both  the  days  and  nights 
of  the  year.  And  as  to  the  thirty-five  (formulas)  there 
are,  they  are  the  thirteenth  months  (Agni's)  self, — 
the  body  (consists  of)  thirty  (limbs^),  the  feet  of  two, 
the  breath  of  two  (in-breathing  and  off-breathing), 
and  the  head  is  the  thirty-fifth:  so  much  is  the  year. 
And  in  this  way  this  ^'atarudriya  of  his  attains  to 
(conformity  with)  the  year,  Agni,  and  corresponds 
to  the  year,  Agni.  And,  indeed,  in  the  S2i7idi\a.  fire- 
altar  as  many  bricks  with  formulas  attached  to  them 
are  placed  in  the  middle,  for  these  bricks  are  indeed 
the  same  as  these  different  Agnis  (invoked  in  the 
6'atarudriya);  and  thus  these  Agnis  of  his  come  to 
have  oblations  offered  to  them  separately  by  means 
of  the  6'atarudriya. 

44.  As  to  this  they  say,  '  How  does  this  ^'ataru- 
driya  of  his  attain  to  (conformity  with)   the  Great 


^  As  Prof.  Weber, '  Die  vedischen  Nachrichten  von  den  Naksha- 
tra,'  p.  298,  points  out,  this  passage  points  to  a  six  years'  period 
of  intercalation,  since,  in  counting  360  days  in  the  year,  the 
remainder  accumulates  in  six  years  to  an  intercalary  month  of 
thirty-five  days  (or  thirty-six  according  to  ^at.  Br.  X,  5,  4,  5) ;  and 
accordingly  in  \%.  S.  XXX,  15,  and  Taitt.  Ar.  IV,  19,  i,  the 
names  of  the  six  years  of  such  a  period  of  intercalation  are  men- 
tioned ;  while  a  five  years'  period  and  the  names  of  the  respective 
years  are  more  frequently  referred  to. 

'^  Viz.  twenty  fingers  and  toes,  the  upper  and  lower  arms,  the 
thighs  and  shanks,  and  the  hands. 


1 68  i-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAA^A. 

Litany^? — how  does  it  correspond  to  the  Great 
Litany?'  Well,  those  twenty-five  formulas  which 
there  are  on  both  sides  of  the  eighties  ^  they  are  the 
twenty-five-fold  body^;  and  where  the  body  (of  the 
altar-bird)  is,  that  (includes)  the  head,  and  the  wings 
and  tail.  And  what  eighties  (of  formulas)  there  are  (in 
the  ^'atarudriya),  thereby  indeed  the  (corresponding) 
eighties  (of  the  Mahad  uktham)  are  obtained,  for  by 
eighties  the  Great  Litany  is  recited.  And  what 
there  is  (in  the  .S'atarudriya)  after  the  eighties  that  is 
for  him  the  same  as  what  there,  in  the  Great  Litany, 
is  after  the  eighties'*;  and  in  this  way  this  ^'atarudriya 

^  For  the  mahad  uktham,  or  Great  Litany,  recited  on  the 
Mahavrata  day,  see  p.  no,  note  3.  According  to  Saya;/a,  however, 
this  does  not  refer  to  the  Mahad  uktham,  or  Great  Litany,  itself, 
but  to  its  Stotra,  the  Mahavrata-saman  (cf.  note  on  X,  i,  i,  5),  by 
the  chanting  of  which  it  is  preceded,  and  which,  like  the  Great 
Litany  itself,  is  represented  as  being  composed  of  the  different 
parts  of  Agni-Pra^apati's  bird-shaped  body.  Now,  that  part  of 
the  chant  which  corresponds  to  the  god's  trunk  (aiman)  is  the 
only  part  of  this  Stotra  which  is  chanted  in  the  Fankavimsa.- 
stoma,  or  twenty-five-versed  hymn-form,  which,  indeed,  is  the 
characteristic  Stoma  of  the  Mahavrata  day,  all  other  Stotras  of 
that  rite  being  chanted  in  that  form.  It  is,  however,  doubtful  to 
me  whether  it  is  not  rather  the  opening  part  of  the  Great  Litany 
itself  representing  the  trunk  that  is  here  referred  to,  and  w'hich, 
indeed,  consists  of  twenty-five  verses;  cf  F.  Max  Miiller,  Upanishads, 
I, p.  1 83.  Besides,  it  has  always  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  particular 
arrangement  of  the  Great  Litany  which  the  authors  of  the  Brah- 
ma7/a  had  before  them,  may  have  differed  in  some  respects  from 
those  known  to  us. 

^  See  p.  112,  note  i. 

^  That  is,  the  body  with  its  twenty-four  limbs,  viz.  the  two  arms, 
two  legs,  and  the  twenty  fingers  and  toes, 

*  According  to  Sayawa,  the  Pa77X'avi?«ja-stotra,  chanted  after  the 
Mahad  uktham,  is  here  referred  to.  See  p.  in,  note  i.  Sayawa 
takes  it  to  refer  to  the  prose  formulas  at  the  end  of  the  .Sastra, 
which,  he  says,  represent  the  mind  (buddhi)  of  Pra^apati. 


IX    KANDA,    I    ADHYAYA,    2    BRAHMAA^A,    4.         1 69 

of  his  attains  to  (conformity  with)  the  Great  Litany; 
in  this  way  it  corresponds  to  the  Great  Litany. 

Sfx'ONd  Braiimaa^-v. 

1.  He  then  sprinkles  him  (Agni-Rudra,  the  fire- 
altar).  For  the  gods,  having  now  appeased  him 
by  the  KS'atarudriya,  thereby  appeased  him  still  fur- 
ther ;  and  in  like  manner  does  this  (Sacrificer),  now 
that  he  has  appeased  him  by  the  ^atarudriya,  still 
further  appease  him  thereby. 

2.  With  water  he  sprinkles  him\ — water  is  a 
means  of  appeasing  (soothing) :  he  thus  appeases 
him  thereby.  He  sprinkles  him  all  over;  he  thus 
appeases  him  all  over.  Thrice  he  sprinkles, — three- 
fold is  Agni  :  as  great  as  Agni  is,  as  great  as  is  his 
measure,  with  so  much  he  thus  appeases  him. 

3.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  sprinkles  him, — that 
Agni  (the  fire-altar),  doubtless,  is  these  worlds  :  by 
water  he  thus  encompasses  these  worlds,  by  the 
ocean,  indeed,  he  encompasses  them.  On  every  side 
(he  sprinkles  the  altar):  hence  the  ocean  flows  round 
these  worlds  on  every  side.  From  left  to  right  (he 
sprinkles):  hence  the  ocean  flows  round  these  worlds 
from  left  to  right. 

4.  For  safety  from  injury  it  is  the  Agnidh  who 
sprinkles,  for  the  Agnidh  is  the  same  as  Agni,  and 
no  one  injures  his  own  self.  P>om  a  stone  (he 
sprinkles),  for  from  the  rock  water  springs  forth; — • 
from  the  arm-pit,  for  from  the  arm-pit  water  springs 
forth; — from  the  right  arm-pit'-,  for  from  the  right 
arm-pit  Water  springs  forth. 


*  Or  rather,  he  pours  water  on  it  (the  altar). 

*  That  is,  from  the  lower  (or  hindmost)  point  where  the  right 


1 70  .yATAPATHA-BRAHMAA'A. 

5.  [He  sprinkles  the  stone,  with,  Va^.  S,  XVII,  i], 
'The  food  that  is  lying  in  the  rock,  in  the 
mountain,' — for  that  food,  water,  is  indeed  con- 
tained in  the  rock,  in  the  mountains; — 'the  drink 
that  is  gathered  from  waters,  plants  and  trees,' 
— for  from  all  that  that  drink  is  indeed  gathered; — 
'that  sap  and  food  bring  ye  unto  us,  O  Maruts, 
as  bountiful  givers  !' — for  the  Maruts  are  the  rulers 
of  the  rain.  With  '  In  the  rock  is  thy  hunger,'  he 
(after  watering  the  altar)  sets  down  (the  pitcher  on  the 
stone) :  he  thus  lays  hunger  into  the  stone,  whence  the 
stone  is  not  fit  for  eating.  But  hard  also  is  the  stone, 
and  hard  is  hunger:  he  thus  puts  the  hard  along  with 
the  hard.  With, '  In  me  thy  food  !'  he  takes  up  (the 
pitcher):  he  thereby  takes  up  the  food  into  his  own 
self.     Thus  (he  does)  a  second  and  a  third  time. 

6.  Having  (finally)  set  down  the  pitcher,  he 
perambulates  thrice  (the  altar) ;  for  when  (in  sprink- 
ling) he  walks  all  round  it,  he,  as  it  were,  makes  light 
of  him  (Agni-Rudra).  He  now  makes  amends  to 
him,  for  (his  own)  safety. 

7.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  perambulates  it, — he 
then  (in  sprinkling  the  altar)  goes  after  him^  (Agni- 
Rudra):  thereupon  he  now  recovers  his  own  self 
unto  life,  and  so  does  he  by  that  self  of  his  obtain 
all  vital  power. 

8.  Thrice  he  perambulates  it,  for  thrice  he  walks 
round  it  (whilst  sprinkling) :  thus  as  many  times  as 
he  walks  round  it,  so  many  times  does  he  peram- 
bulate it. 


wing  joins  the  body  of  the  altar.     He  there  places  a  stone,  from 
which  he  begins  the  sprinkling  of  the  altar. 
1  See  IX,  I,  I,  33. 


IX    KANDA,    I    ADHYAVA,    2    BRAIlMAiVA,     1 3.        i;! 

9.  Having  thereupon  put  that  stone  into  the 
water-pitcher,  they  throw  it  in  that  (south-western) 
direction,  for  that  is  Nirr/ti's  region :  he  thus 
consigns  pain  ^  to   Nir/'/ti's  region. 

10.  For  at  that  time,  the  gods,  having  appeased 
him  by  the  ^'atarudriya  and  the  water,  thereby  drove 
out  his  pain,  his  evil ;  and  in  Hke  manner  does  this 
(Sacrificer)  now,  after  appeasing  him  by  the  .S'ataru- 
driya  and  the  water,  cast  away  his  pain,  his  evil. 

11.  Outside  the  fire-altar  he  throws  it;  for  this 
fire-altar  indeed  is  the  same  as  these  (three)  worlds: 
he  thus  puts  pain  outside  these  worlds; — outside  the 
sacrificial  ground  (vedi);  for  the  Vedi  is  this  (earth): 
he  thus  puts  pain  outside  this  earth. 

12.  Whilst  standing  at  the  right  thigh  of  the 
Vedi,  with  his  face  to  the  east,  he  throws  it  south- 
wards, with,  'Let  thy  pain  enter  him  whom  we 
hate!'  and  thus  its  pain  enters  whomsoever  he 
hates.  He  may  say,  '  Let  thy  pain  enter  so-and- 
so  ! '  naming  him  whom  he  hates,  and  then  he  has 
no  longer  any  hold  upon  him ;  but  let  him  take  no 
notice  of  this,  for  indicated  of  himself  is  he  whom 
he  who  knows  this  hates.  If  it-  should  remain  un- 
broken, let  him  bid  (the  Pratiprasthatr?)  to  break  it ; 
for  only  when  it  is  broken,  the  pain  enters  him 
whom  he  hates.  They  return  (to  the  altar)  without 
looking  back  :  they  thus  leave  pain  and  evil  behind 
without  looking  back  to  them. 

13.  Having  returned,  he  makes  the  bricks  his  own 

'  The  burning  heat  of  the  fire,  and  all  physical  and  mental 
suffering. 

"^  Viz.  the  stone,  or  the  pot,  according  to  others  ;  cf.  Katy.  Aautas. 
XVIII,  2,  5-8.  According  to  Prof.  Weber  the  stone  is  meant  to 
represent  the  hungry  greed  of  the  fire. 


172  S-ATAPATHA-ERAHMAA^A. 


milch  COWS ;  for  the  gods,  having  now  appeased  him 
(Agni-Rudra)  by  the  K^atarudriya  and  the  water,  and 
having  driven  out  his  pain  and  evil,  returned  (to  the 
altar)  and  made  the  bricks  their  own  milch  cows  ; 
and  in  like  manner  does  this  (Sacrificer)  now,  after 
appeasing  him  by  the  ^'atarudriya  and  the  water,  and 
casting  off  his  pain  and  evil,  return  and  make  the 
bricks  his  own  milch  cows. 

14.  And  some  say,  '  Let  him  make  them  his  own 
whilst  sitting,  for  sitting  one  milks  the  cow.'  But 
let  him  rather  make  them  his  own  standing;  for 
that  fire-altar  is  these  worlds,  and  these  worlds  are, 
as  it  were,  standing.  And,  moreover,  one  is  stronger 
whilst  standing. 

15.  [He  does  so],  whilst  standing  (near  the  right 
thigh  of  the  altar)  with  his  face  towards  the  north-east; 
in  front  stands  that  cow  by  the  Sacrificer  with  her 
face  towards  the  west  (back),  for  from  the  right 
side  they  approach  the  cow  which  stands  with  its 
face  towards  the  back  (west). 

16.  And  wherever  he  reaches  (whilst  stretching 
his  arms  over  the  altar),  there  he  touches  it  and 
mutters  this  formula  (Va^.  S.  XVII,  2),  '  Let  these 
bricks  be  mine  own  milch  cows,  O  Agni!'for 
Agni  rules  over  this  making  of  cows,  whence  he 
addresses  Agni  out  of  so  many  deities  ; — 'One,  and 
ten^  ....  and  a  hundred  thousand  millions, 
and  a  billion;' — for  the  one,  to  wit,  one  and  ten, 
is  the  lowest  quantity,  and  the  other,  to  wit,  a  hundred 
thousand  millions,  and  a  billion,  is  the  highest 
quantity ;   thus,  having  comprehended  them  by  the 


^  The  intervening  numbers  here  omitted  increase  by  multiples 
of  ten. 


IX    KAA'DA,    I     ADHYAYA,    2    BKAI1MA2VA,     l8.        1 73 

lowest  and  the  highest  quantity,  the  gods  made 
them  their  own  milch  cows ;  and  in  like  manner 
does  this  (Sacrificer),  having  thus  comprehended 
them  by  the  lowest  and  the  highest  quantity,  make 
them  his  own  milch  cows.  Hence  also  he  need  not 
care  to  make  many  (cows)  his  own  \  for  in  yonder 
world  that  (Sacrificer),  by  means  of  the  Brahman 
(holy  writ),  the  Yajc^us,  will  make  many  (cows)  his 
own.  And  in  that  he  carries  on  (the  numbers) 
uninterruptedly,  thereby  he  carries  on,  without  in- 
terruption, his  objects  of  desire. 

I  7.  And  as  to  why  he  makes  the  bricks  his  own 
milch  cows, — this  fire-altar  is  speech,  for  with  speech 
it  is  built  up  ;  and  when  he  says,  '  One,  and  ten,  .  .  . 
and  a  hundred  thousand  millions,  and  a  billion,' — - 
'one'  is  speech,  and  a  hundred  thousand  millions  is 
speech,  and  a  billion  is  speech  :  it  is  Speech  herself 
that  the  gods  thereby  made  their  own  milch  cow  ; 
and  in  like  manner  does  the  Sacrificer  thereby 
make  Speech  herself  his  own  milch  cow.  And  in 
that  he  carries  on  (the  numbers)  uninterruptedly, 
thereby  it  is  Speech  herself  that  he  carries  on  : — 
'Let  these  bricks  be  mine  own  milch  cows, 
O  Agni,  hereafter  in  yonder  world!'  He 
thereby  makes  them  his  own  milch  cows  in  this 
world,  and  he  also  makes  them  his  own  milch  cows 
in  yonder  w^orld  ;  and  thus  they  are  profitable  to  him 
in  both  worlds,  in  this  one  and  in  the  other. 

i8.  [Va^.  S.  XVH,  3],  '  The  seasons  ye  are,' — 
for  these  (bricks)  are  indeed  the  seasons  ; — '  law- 
sustaining,'  that  is,  'truth-sustaining;' — 'be  ye 
season-abiding,  law-sustain  ing  ! ' — for  the  bricks 

^  ?  That  is  10  say,  he  need  not  touch  the  altar  more  than  once. 


I  74  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAA^A. 

are  the  days  and  nights,  and  the  days  and  nights 
indeed  abide  in  the  seasons; — 'fat-showering, 
honey-showering,' — he  thereby  makes  them  fat- 
showering  and  honey-showering  for  himself. 

19.  '  The  widely-shining  by  name,' — for  the 
gods  then  called  those  bricks  to  them  by  their 
names,  and  in  the  same  way  in  which  they  called 
them,  they  turned  unto  them  ;  but  the  '  space-fillers  ' 
alone  stood  with  averted  faces  discharging  water, 
having  no  names  applied  to  them.  They  called 
them  by  the  name  '  the  widely-shining,'  and  they 
turned  unto  them.  Hence,  each  time  he  has  laid 
down  ten  bricks,  he  addresses  them  with  the  '  space- 
filling^ (verse)':  he  thereby  makes  them  widely- 
shining  (vira^),  for  the  Virac^  (metre)  consists  of  ten 
syllables  :  — '  wish-milking,  never-failing,'  —  he 
thereby  makes  them  wish-milking  and  never-failing. 

20.  He  then  draws  a  frog,  a  lotus-flower,  and  a 
bamboo-shoot  across  (the  central  part  of  the  altar). 
For  the  gods  having  now  appeased  him  by  the 
^Satarudriya  and  the  water,  and  having  driven  out 
his  pain  and  evil,  thereby  still  further  appeased  him ; 
and  in  like  manner  does  this  (Sacrificer),  now  that 
he  has  appeased  him  by  the  6'atarudriya  and  the 
water,  and  driven  out  his  pain  and  evil,  still  further 
appease  him  thereby.  In  every  direction  he  draws 
them :  he  thus  appeases  him  everywhere. 

21.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  draws  them  across. 
Now,  in  the  beginning,  when  the  jRishls,  the  vital 
airs,  made  up  that  Agni  ^,  they  sprinkled  him  with 
water  :  that  water  dripped  off  and  became  the  frogs. 

^  That  is  with  the  verse  Va^.  S.  XII,  54,  beginning  '  Lokam 
pn«a,'  'Fill  thou  the  space ; '  see  part  iii,  p.  153  note. 
^  See  VI,  I,  I,  1-5. 


IX    KAA^DA,     I    ADHYAYA,    2    BRAHMAiVA,    25.       1 75 


22.  They  (the  waters)  said  to  Pra^apati,  'What- 
ever moisture  ^  we  had,  has  gone  down.'  He  said, 
'  This  tree  shall  know  it ! ' — he  shall  know  (vettu), 
he  shall  taste  it  (saw  vettu) — that  one,  indeed,  they 
mystically  call  '  vetasa '  (bamboo),  for  the  gods  love 
the  mystic.  And  because  they  said,  '  Down  (avak) 
has  gone  our  moisture  (ka),'  they  became  avakkas  ; — 
'  avakkas,'  they  mystically  call  '  avakas  (lotuses),' 
for  the  gods  love  the  mystic.  These,  then,  are 
those  three  kinds  of  water,  to  wit,  the  frog,  the 
lotus-flower,  and  the  bamboo-shoot :  by  means  of 
these  three  kinds  of  water  he  appeases  him. 

23.  And,  again,  why  he  draws  them  across  it  ; — 
when  he  (Agni,  the  fire-altar)  is  built  up,  he  is 
being  born,  and  he  is  born  for  every  kind  of  food  ; 
and  these  are  every  kind  of  food,  to  wit,  the  frog, 
the  lotus-flower,  and  the  bamboo-shoot,  for  these, 
indeed,  are  animals,  water,  and  trees  :  with  all  this 
food  he  orratifies  him. 

24.  With  the  frog,  on  the  part  of  animals,  whence, 
of  animals,  the  frog  is  the  one  affording  least  sub- 
sistence, for  he  is  used  up  ; — with  the  lotus-flower,  on 
the  part  of  water,  whence  of  the  kinds  of  water 
(plants),  lotus-flowers  are  those  affording  least  sub- 
sistence, for  they  are  used  up ; — and  with  the 
bamboo-shoot,  on  the  part  of  trees ;  whence,  of 
trees,  the  bamboo  is  the  one  affording  least  subsis- 
tence, for  it  is  used  up. 

25.  Having  tied  them  to  a  cane,  he,  in  the  first 
place,  draws  them  eastwards  along  the  right  (south) 
part  of  the  (body  of  the)  altar  inside  the  enclosing- 


'  Thus,  or  essence  (raja),  according  to  Sayawa;  cf.  X,  6,  5,  i. 
The  word  '  ka'  has,  however,  also  the  meaning  'joy.' 


I  76  S-ATAPATHA-BRAHMA^-A. 


Stones,  with  (Va^.  S.  XVII,  4),  'With  the  lotus- 
flower  of  the  ocean  we  encompass  thee,  O 
Agni :  be  thou  bright  and  propitious  unto  us! ' 
that  is,  '  With  the  waters  of  the  ocean  we  appease 
thee.' 

26.  Then  northwards  along  the  hind  part  (of  the 
altar),  with  (Va^.  S.  XVII,  5),  'With  an  outer 
vesture  of  cold  we  encompass  thee,  O  Agni: 
be  thou  bright  and  propitious  unto  us!' — that 
part  of  the  cold  which  is  frozen  hard  is  an  outer 
vesture  of  cold  :  thus,  '  By  the  frozen  part  of  cold 
we  appease  thee  ! ' 

27.  Then  eastwards  along  the  left  (north)  part, 
with  (Vaf.  S.  XVII,  6),  'Upon  the  earth,  into 
the  reed,  into  the  rivers  descend  thou.  O  Agni, 
thou  art  the  bile  ^  of  waters:  with  them,  come 
thou,  O  she-frog,  and  make  the  sacrifice  bright- 
coloured  and  propitious  for  us!'  as  the  text,  so 
the  meaning. 

28.  Then  southwards  along  the  forepart,  with 
(Va^.  S.  XVII,  7),  'Thou  art  the  receptacle  of 
waters,  the  abode  of  the  ocean:  let  thy  darts 
burn  others  than  us!  unto  us  be  thou  bright 
and  propitious  ! '  as  the  text,  so  the  meaning.  He 
first  draws  them  thus  2,  then  thus,  then  thus,  then 
thus  :  that  is  from  left  to  right,  for  so  it  is  wdth  the 
gods. 

29.  Over  the  body  (of  the  altar)  he  draws  them 


^  That  is,  '  the  heat '  which  is  considered  the  chief  property  of 
the  bihous  humour. 

^  The  procedure  in  this  case  is  an  exact  counterpart  of  the 
ploughing  of  the  altar-site,  for  which  see  VII,  2,  2,  8-12,  with 
notes.  Hence  also  the  verbs  expressive  of  the  two  actions  are 
closely  analogous,  viz.  vikr/shati  and  vikarshati. 


IX    KAA^DA,     I    ADHVAYA,    2    BRAHMAiVA,    32.        177 

first,  for  of  (the  bird,  or  Agni)  that  is  born  the  body 
is  born  first,  then  the  right  wing,  then  the  tail,  then 
the  left  wing :  that  is  from  left  to  right,  for  so  it  is 
with  the  gods. 

30.  Over  the  wings  and  tail  he  draws  them  in  the 
direction  of  the  body  (self)  :  he  thus  lays  calmness 
into  his  own  self ; — from  the  further  end  (he  draws) 
hitherwards  :  he  thus  lays  calmness  into  his  own 
self  from  the  further  end  hitherwards.  The  right 
wing,  with  (Va^.  S.  XVII,  8),  'O  bright  Agni, 
with  thy  light,  (with  thy  dainty  tongue,  O  god, 
bring  hither  the  gods,  and  worship  them)!' 
The  tail,  with  (Va,^.  S.  XVII,  9),  'O  bright  and 
shining  Agni,  (bring  hither  the  gods  to  our 
sacrifice  and  our  offering)!'  The  left  wing, 
with  (Vaf.  S.  XVII,  lo),  'He  who  with  bright 
and  glittering  light  (shineth  upon  the  earth, 
as  the  dawns  with  their  glow,  who,  the  ever 
young,  speeding,  as  in  the  race,  in  the  battle,  of 
the  steed,  thirsteth  not  in  the  heat).'  '  Bright,' 
he  says  each  time,  for  whatever  is  kindly  and  pro- 
pitious is  bright :  he  thus  propitiates  him  thereby. 

31.  With  seven  (formulas)  he  draws  them  across, — 
the  altar  consists  of  seven  layers,  and  seven  seasons 
are  a  }'ear,  and  Agni  is  the  year :  as  great  as 
Agni  is,  as  great  as  is  his  measure,  with  so  much 
he  thus  crosses  him.  Having  thrown  the  cane  on 
the  heap  of  rubbish  ; — 

32.  [The  Adhvaryu]  then  sings  hymns  round  it 
(the  altar) ; — for  therein  that  whole  Agni  is  completed; 
and  the  gods  laid  into  him  that  highest  form,  im- 
mortality ;  and  in  like  manner  does  this  (Sacrificer) 
thereby  lay  into  him  that  highest  form,  immortality. 
Saman-hymns  are  (used),  for  samans  are  vital  airs, 

[4.3]  N 


1 78  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

and  the  vital  airs  are  immortality :  immortality,  that 
highest  form,  he  thus  lays  into  him.  On  every  side 
he  sings  around  it  :  everywhere  he  thus  lays  im- 
mortality, that  highest  form,  into  him. 

2)S-  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  sings  saman-hymns 
round  about  it; — the  gods  then  desired,  'Let  us  make 
this  body  of  ours  boneless  and  immortal.'  They 
spake,  '  Think  ye  upon  this,  how  we  may  make  this 
body  of  ours  boneless  and  immortal  !  '  They  spake, 
'  Meditate  (/C'it)  ye !  '  whereby  indeed  they  meant 
to  say,  '  Seek  ye  a  layer  (/^iti) !  seek  ye  how  we 
may  make  this  body  of  ours  boneless  and  im- 
mortal ! ' 

34.  Whilst  meditating,  they  saw  those  saman- 
hymns,  and  sang  them  round  about  it,  and  by 
means  of  them  they  made  that  body  of  theirs  bone- 
less and  immortal;  and  in  like  manner  does  the  Sac- 
rificer,  when  he  sings  the  saman-hymns  round  about 
it,  make  that  body  of  his  boneless  and  immortal. 
On  every  side  he  sings  :  everywhere  he  thus  makes 
that  body  of  his  boneless  and  immortal.  Standing 
he  sings,  for  these  worlds  stand,  as  it  were ;  and 
whilst  standing  one  doubtless  is  stronger.  He 
sings,  after  uttering  (the  syllable)  '  h'wi,'  for  therein 
the  saman-hymn  becomes  whole  and  complete. 

35.  He  first  sings  the  Gayatra  hymn  \  for  the 
Gayatri  metre   is  Agni  :    he   thus   makes  Agni   his 


^  The  Gayatra- saman  is  the  hymn-tune  composed  on  the  verse 
called  '  the  Gayatri,' /ar  excellence,  or  *  Savitri '  (tat  savitur  varewyam, 
Rig-veda  III,  62,  10),  which  plays  an  important  part  in  the  religious 
life  of  the  Hindu.  The  verse,  as  figured  for  chanting,  is  given, 
Sama-v.  Calc.  ed.  vol.  v,  p.  601.  On  the  present  occasion,  according 
to  La/y.  Sx.  I,  5,  1 1,  a  different  text,  viz.  Sama-v.  II,  8,  14  (Rig-veda 
IX,  66,  19,  agna  ayia/«shi  pavase),  is  to  be  sung  to  this  tune. 


IX    KAiVDA,     I     ADIIYAVA,    2    BRAHMAA'A,    39.        I  79 

head,  and  that  head  of  his  (or  of  him,  Agni)  he  thus 
makes  boneless  and  immortal. 

36.  The  Rathantara^  (hymn  he  sings)  at  the  right 
wing;  for  the  Rathantara  is  this  (earth),  and  this 
(earth),  doubtless,  is  the  most  essential  (rasatama) 
of  these  worlds,  for  it  is  in  her  that  all  these 
essences  (rasa)  are  contained,  and  '  rasantama,' 
indeed,  they  call  mystically,  '  rathantara,'  for  the  gods 
love  the  mystic  :  he  thus  makes  this  (earth)  his 
right  wing,  and  that  right  wing  of  his  he  thus  makes 
boneless  and  immortal. 

37.  The  Br/hat^  (h}mn  he  sings)  at  the  left  wing  ; 
the  Brz'hat  (great),  doubtless,  is  the  sky,  for  the  sky 
is  the  greatest  (of  worlds)  :  he  thus  makes  the  sky 
his  (Agni's)  left  wing,  and  that  left  wing  of  his  he 
thus  makes  boneless  and  immortal. 

^S.  The  Vamadevya  ^  (hymn  he  sings)  on  the 
body  (of  the  altar) ;  for  the  Vamadevya  is  the 
breath,  and  the  breath  is  air  (vayu,  the  wind),  and 
he,  Vayu,  doubtless,  is  the  self  (body)  of  all  the  gods  : 
he  thus  makes  the  air  (wind)  his  body,  and  that 
body  of  his  he  thus  makes  boneless  and  immortal. 

39.  The  Yacr;7aya^/7iya  ^  (hymn  he  sings)  near 
the  tail ; — the  Ya^/Iaya^/nya,  doubtless,  is  the  moon  ; 
for  whenever  a  sacrifice  becomes  completed  -,  the 
essence  of  its  oblations  goes  up  to  him  (the  moon) ; 

^  The  Rathantara,  Br/hat,  Vamadevya,  and  Ya^i;^;7aya^//iya  tunes 
are  apparently  to  be  sung  here  on  their  original  texts  (Sama-v.  II, 
30,  31,  abhi  tva  siua  nonunia// ;  II,  159,  160,  tvam  id  dhi  havamahe  ; 
II)  32,  33,  kaya  naj  X'itra  a  bhuvat;  and  II,  53,  54,  ya^«a-ya_§^/7a  vo 
agnaye),  though  hardly  in  their  elaborate  setting,  as  performed  in 
chanting. 

^  It  should  be  remembered  that  the  chanting  of  the  Ya^waya^mya 
(or  Agnish/oma)-siiman  marks  the  completion  (sawstha)  of  the 
ordinary  (Agnish/oma)  Soma-sacrifice. 

N  2 


l8o  i'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

and  inasmuch  as  sacrifice  after  sacrifice  (ya^;/a)  goes 
up  to  him,  the  moon  is  the  Ya^Mya^/^iya  :  he  thus 
makes  the  moon  his  (Agni's)  tail,  and  that  tail  of 
his  he  thus  makes  boneless  and  immortal. 

40.  He  then  sings  the  heart  of  Pra^apati^; — the 
heart  assuredly  is  yonder  sun,  for  he  (the  sun)  is 
smooth,  and  the  heart  is  smooth  ;  he  is  round,  and 
the  heart  is  round.  On  the  body  (of  the  altar) 
he  sings,  for  the  heart  is  in  the  body ; — at  the  arm- 
pit^, for  the  heart  is  in  (the  vicinity  of)  the  armpit ; — 

^  The  Pra^apati-hr/'daya,  or  Pra^apater  hr/dayam,  as  figured  for 
chanting,  is  given,  Sama-v.  Calc.  ed.  vol.  ii,  p.  499.  It  consists  of 
the  words,  ima,^  pra_^a/2  pra^apate(r)  hr/dayam  pra^ariipam  a^t^ane, 
wiih  inserted  stobhas  and  modulations.  It  is  followed  by  a  simpler 
form,  which  is  perhaps  the  one  used  on  the  present  occasion. 

^  Viz.  on  the  place  where  the  right  wing  joins  the  body  of  the 
altar.  According  to  other  authorities,  the  ^S'yaita  hymn-tune  is  like- 
wise to  be  sung  near  the  left  arm-pit  (or,  according  to  ^'aw^'ilya,  at 
the  place  where  the  Adhvaryu  mounts  the  altar).  For  other  varia- 
tions, see  Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  XIII,  p.  276.  I  do  not  think  that  the 
ritual  of  the  White  Ya^us,  in  omitting  the  left  arm-pit,  shows  any 
gap  or  inconsistency,  since  the  right  arm-pit  is  marked  out,  not  for 
any  bodily  parallelism,  but  for  the  simple  reason  that  it  is  supposed 
to  indicate  the  position  of  the  heart.  Whilst  all  the  other  places 
on  which  hymns  are  sung  are  essential  parts  of  the  bird  Agni,  the 
arm-pit  is  not  an  essential  part,  but  is  merely  indicative  of  the  central 
organ  of  the  body.  La/y.  I,  5,  11  seqq,  supplies  the  following 
directions,  apparently  implying  a  somewhat  different  order  of  pro- 
cedure from  that  followed  in  our  text :  He  passes  along  the  south, 
and  whilst  standing  (east  of  the  altar)  with  his  face  towards  the  west, 
he  sings  the  Gayatra  at  the  head.  Returning,  he  sings  the  Rathan- 
tara  at  the  right  wing.  Going  round  behind,  he  sings  the  Br/hat 
at  the  left  wing.  Going  back,  and  standing  behind  the  tail,  with 
his  face  towards  the  east,  he  sings  the  Yagft^yag?nya..  The  Vama- 
devya  he  sings  at  the  right,  and  the  Pra^apati-hr/daya  at  the  left, 
arm-pit.  Then  follow  different  views  held  by  different  teachers. — 
With  this  ceremony,  by  which  homage  is  paid  to  the  different  parts 
of  Agni-Pra^apati's  body,  compare  the  similar,  but  more  elaborate, 
ceremony  of  the  Parimada/z  at  the  Mahavrata,  X,  i,  2,  9  with  note. 


IX    KANDA,    2    ADIIYAYA,     I     BRAHMAiVA,    I.  l8l 

at  the  right  armpit,  for  the  heart  is  nearer  thereto  ^ : 
he  thus  makes  the  sun  his  (Agni's)  heart,  and  that 
heart  of  his  he  thus  makes  boneless  and  immortal, 

41.  He  sings  about  offspring  (pra^a)  and  Pra^a- 
pati  (the  lord  of  creatures  and  procreation) ; — when 
he  sings  about  offspring,  he  lays  the  heart  into  off- 
spring ;  and  when  he  sings  about  Pra^apati,  he  lays 
the  heart  into  Agni. 

42.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  sings  about  offspring 
and  Pra^apati  ; — this  Agni,  doubtless,  is  both  off- 
spring and  the  lord  of  offspring,  and  hence,  when 
he  sings  about  Agni,  he  lays  the  heart  both  into 
the  offspring  and  into  the  lord  of  offspring. 

43.  These  (hymns)  are  the  immortal  bricks ;  he 
lays  them  down  last  (highest)  of  all : — he  thereby 
makes  immortality  the  highest  thing  of  all  this 
(universe),  and  hence  immortality  is  the  highest 
thing  of  all  this  (universe).  Let  none  other  but  the 
Adhvaryu-  sing  ;  for  these  (hymns)  are  bricks,  and  he 
(Agni,  the  fire-altar)  would  be  built  up  in  the  wrong 
way  ^,  were  any  other  than  the  Adhvaryu  to  sing. 

Second  Adhyaya.     First  BRAHMAiVA. 

Day  of  Prkparation  for  Soma-sacrifice. 

I.  On  the  day  of  preparation,  early  in  the  morning, 
when   the    sun    has    risen,    he   releases   his    speech. 


^  That  is,  by  taking  the  auricles  as  parts  of  the  heart. 

^  According  to  La/y.  I,  5,  i  seq.,  it  is  the  Prastot/V  who  sings 
these  samans.  A  similar  conflict  of  competence  in  this  respect  is 
referred  to  not  only  in  regard  to  detached  samans  (cf.  Katy.  IV, 
9,  6-9),  but  even  in  regard  to  such  solemn  performances  as  the 
chanting  of  the  Mahavrata-saman  (cf.  note  on  X,  i,  i,  5). 

^  Vi-X'ita,  in  this  sense,  appears  to  be  a  ami^  Xtyuufvov.  Sayawa 
seems  to  have  read  vi^Mta  (parabhQta,  defeated)  instead. 


1 82  -SATAPATHA-BRAHMAA^A. 

Having  released  his  speech,  he  takes  clarified  butter, 
in  five  ladlings,  and  throws  five  chips  of  gold  thereon. 
Then  these  three  (materials),  sour  curds,  honey  and 
ghee,  are  poured  together,  either  into  a  dish,  or 
a  pot  with  a  wide  mouth  ;  and  he  puts  a  handful  of 
sacrificial  grass  thereon. 

2.  He  then  mounts  the  fire-altar,  with  (Va^.  S. 
XVn,  ii),  'Homage  be  to  thy  heat,  thy  fireM 
homage  be  to  thy  flame!' — for  that  Agni  has 
now  been  completely  restored,  and  he  now  is  equal 
to  injuring  whomever  he  might  wish  to  injure ; 
and  whomever  he  injures,  he  injures  either  by 
his  heat,  or  by  his  fire,  or  by  his  flame  ;  in  this 
way  he  does  not  injure  him  thereby  (etai//)  ; — 
'Let  thy  darts  burn  others  than  us!  unto  us 
be  thou  bright  and  propitious!'  as  the  text, 
so  the  sense. 

3.  Having  mounted  the  altar,  he  makes  the 
libation  of  fivefold-taken  ghee  on  the  naturally- 
perforated  (brick) :  the  significance  of  this  has  been 
explained  ^. 

4.  On  the  naturally-perforated  (brick)  he  makes  the 
libation — the  naturally-perforated  one  is  the  breath  : 
into  (the  channel  of)  the  breath  he  thus  puts  food. 

5.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  ofl^ers  on  the 
naturally-perforated  one  ; — this  (brick)  is  an  uttara- 
vedi  (high-altar)  of  Agni  (the  fire-altar) ;  and  that 
former    libation   which   he    makes  ^    belongs   to   the 


'  Or,  '  Homage  be  to  thy  burning  (consuming)  fire ! '  as  Mahi- 
dhara  takes  '  harase  j-o/Jishe,'  and  perhaps  also  the  Brahma^za,  though 
*  etai^,'  used  in  reference  to  Agni's  weapons,  would  rather  seem  to 
indicate  a  plurality  of  them. 

^  See  VII,  2,  3,  4 ;  VIII,  6,  3,  15. 


See  III,  5,  2,  9-1 1  ;  the  libation  of  ghee  there  offered  on  the 


IX  KANDA,    2    ADHYAYA,  I  BRAHMAA'A,  8.    1 83 

Soma-sacrifice,  but  this  one  belongs  to  the  fire-altar ; 
this  he  now  offers. 

6.  On  that  (former)  occasion  he  makes  the  libation 
whilst  looking  at  the  gold  ;  for  distinct  is  what  one 
sees,  and  distinct  was  that  high-altar ;  and  thrown 
down  \  indeed,  are  (the  gold  chips)  on  this  occasion, 
and  indistinct  is  what  is  thrown  down,  and  indistinct 
is  this  hioh-altar. 

7.  With  the  Svaha-call  he  makes  the  libation 
on  that  (high-altar),  for  distinct  (manifest)  is  the 
Svaha,  and  distinct  is  that  high-altar ;  but  with  the 
VeZ-call  (he  offers)  on  this  (brick),  for  indistinct  is 
the  Ve/-call,  and  indistinct  is  this  high-altar.  With 
ghee  (they  offer),  for  with  ghee  they  offer  on  the 
high-altar  ; — with  fivefold-taken  (ghee),  for  with  five- 
fold-taken (ghee)  they  offer  on  the  high-altar ; — 
by  turns  (he  makes  the  libations),  for  by  turns  ^ 
they  make  the  libations  on  the  high -altar. 

8.  [He  offers,  with,  Va^''.  S.  XVII,  12,  a-c  resp.], 
'To  the  man-seated,  ve/'!' — the  man-seated  one, 
doubtless,  is  the  breath,  and  men  mean  human 
beings:  he  thereby  gratifies  that  fire  (or  Agni),  the 
breath,  which  is  in  human  beings; — 'To  the  water- 
seated,  ve/!' — he  thereby  gratifies  the  fire  which  is 
in  the  waters; — 'To  the  barhis-seated,  ve/!' — he 

uttara-vedi  being  preparatory  to  the  leading  forward  of  the  fire  to 
the  high-altar. 

^  Each  time  he  has  poured  out  some  of  the  ghee  on  one  of  the 
corners,  or  in  the  centre,  of  the  stone ;  he  throws  one  of  the  chips 
of  gold  thereon,  without  looking  at  it. 

^  That  libation  was  made  crosswise — first  on  the  right  shoulder, 
then  on  the  left  thigh,  then  on  the  right  thigh,  then  on  the  left 
shoulder,  and  finally  in  the  centre,  of  the  (navel  of  the)  high- 
altar.  In  the  same  way  he  offers  crosswise  on  the  svayamat/7>///a 
brick. 


184  .SATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

thereby  gratifies  the  fire  which  is  in  plants^; — 'To 
the  wood-seated,  veil' — he  thereby  gratifies  the 
fire  which  is  in  trees; — 'To  the  heaven-winning, 
ve/!' — the  heaven-winning  one  is  this  Agni  (/'itya): 
it  is  this  Agni  he  thereby  gratifies. 

9.  And  as  to  why  he  says,  '  To  the  man-seated, 
ve^!  To  the  water-seated,  ve/!'  &c.,  these  are  names 
of  this  Agni:  these  names  he  thereby  pleases.  By 
means  of  the  oblation  he  makes  them  a  deity:  for 
whatever  deity  the  oblation  is  prepared,  that  deity 
(they  are),  not  that  deity  for  whom  it  is  not  prepared. 
And,  in  calling  them  by  their  names,  he  also  thereby 
places  those  fires  along  with  this  fire. 

10.  These  are  five  oblations  he  offers, — the  fire- 
altar  consists  of  five  layers,  the  year  of  five  seasons, 
and  Agni  is  the  year:  as  great  as  Agni  is,  as  great 
as  is  his  measure,  with  so  much  food  he  thus  grati- 
fies him. 

11.  He  then  sprinkles  him  (Agni,  the  fire-altar) 
with  the  sour  curds,  honey  and  ghee;  when  he  is 
built  up,  he  is  born,  and  he  is  born  for  every  (kind 
of)  food  ;  and  these,  to  wit,  sour  curds,  honey  and 
ghee,  are  every  (kind  of)  food  :  with  every  (kind  of) 
food  he  thus  gratifies  him.  Everywhere  (he  sprinkles 
the  altar) :  everywhere  he  thus  gratifies  him  with 
every  (kind  of)  food. 

12.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  sprinkles  him; — 
here  that  Agni  has  been  built  up  complete:  on  him 
the  gods  now  bestowed  the  highest  (or  last)  form; 
and  in  like  manner  does  this  (Sacrificer)  now  bestow 
on  him  the  highest  (or  last)  form  ;  but  form  means 

^  Inasmuch  as  '  barhis '  is  the  sacrificial  grass  spread  over  the 
vedi,  or  altar-ground. 


IX    KANDA,    2    ADHYAYA,     I     BRAIIMAiVA,     1 4.        1 85 

food,  and  these,  to  wit,  sour  curds,  honey  and  ghee, 
are  the  most  excellent  kind  of  food  :  this,  the 
most  excellent  form  he  thus  bestows  upon  him  as 
his  highest  (property).  Everywhere  he  sprinkles, 
even  outside  the  enclosing-stones;  everywhere  he 
thus  bestows  on  him  the  highest  form ; — by  means 
of  sacrificial  grass-stalks  (he  sprinkles),  for  they  are 
pure  and  meet  for  sacrifice ;  by  means  of  their 
tops  (he  sprinkles),  for  the  top  (is  sacred)  to  the 
gods. 

13.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  sprinkles  them; — of 
old,  when  the  J^ishis,  the  vital  airs,  joined  him 
together,  they  made  that '  sa^c^urabdiya'  (oblation)^  his 
special  fore-share,  and,  when  he  had  been  built  up, 
they  made  this  (sprinkling)  his  after-share:  thus,  in 
sprinkling  him,  he  gratifies  those  Rzshls,  the  vital 
airs,  who,  when  he  (Agni)  had  been  built  up,  made 
this  his  after-share.  With  sour  curds,  honey  and 
ghee  (he  sprinkles) :  the  significance  of  this  has  been 
explained. 

14.  [He  sprinkles,  with,  Va^.  S.  XVII,  13,  14], 
'The  gods  of  the  gods,  the  worshipful  of  the 
worshipful,' — for  they  (the  vital  airs)  are  indeed 
the  gods  of  (among)  the  gods,  and  the  worshipful  of 
the  worshipful; — 'who  draw  nigh  unto  the  year- 
long share,'  for  they  do  indeed  draw  near  to  this 
their  year-long  share  ; — 'not  eaters  of  oblations, 
— at  this  offering  of  sacrificial  food,' — for  the 
vital  airs,  indeed,  are  not  eaters  of  oblations; — 'may 
themselves  drink  of  the  honey  and  the  ghee!' 

^  That  is,  the  oblation  (made  on  the  bunch  of  sacrificial  grass 
placed  in  the  centre  of  the  freshly  ploughed  altar-site,  where  the 
furrows  meet)  with  the  formula  (Va^.  S.  XII,  74)  beginning  '  sa^i,'-ur 
abdo.'     See  VII,  2,  3,  8. 


1 86  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAA^A. 

that  is,  '  should  themselves  drink  of  this  honey  and 
ghee.' 

15.  'The  gods  who  attained  godhead  over 
the  gods,' — for  these  gods  have  indeed  attained 
a  divine  state  over  the  gods; — 'who  are  the  fore- 
runners of  this  holy  work,' — the  holy  work  is 
this  fire-altar  (and  sacrifice),  and  they  are  the  fore- 
runners thereof; — 'without  whom  no  dwelling- 
place  becometh  pure;'  for  without  the  vital  airs 
no  dwelling-place  becomes  pure^; — 'they  are  not 
on  the  backs  of  the  sky  and  the  earth,' — that 
is,  'they  are  neither  in  the  sky  nor  on  earth:  what- 
ever breathes  therein  they  are.' 

16.  With  two  (verses)  he  sprinkles, — two-footed  is 
the  Sacrificer,  and  the  Sacrificer  is  Agni  :  as  great  as 
Agni  is,  as  great  as  is  his  measure,  with  so  much  he 
thus  sprinkles  him. 

17.  He  then  descends  again  (from  the  altar), 
with  (Va^.  S.  XVII,  15),  'Givers  of  in-breathing, 
givers  of  off-breathing,' — for  this  Agni  who  has 
been  built  up  is  all  these  breathings;  were  he  not  to 
utter  at  this  time  this  (declaration  of)  self-surrender, 
then  that  (Agni)  would  possess  himself  of  those 
breathings  of  his  (the  Sacrificer's) ;  but  now  that  he 
gives  utterance  to  this  self-surrender,  that  (Agni) 
does  not  possess  himself  of  those  breathings  of  his; — 
'Givers  of  in-breathino-,  drivers  of  off-breath- 
ing,  givers  of  through-breathing,  givers  of 
lustre,  givers  of  room,' — he  thereby  says,  'A  giver 
of   this    thou    art    to    me,'- — 'let    thv   darts    burn 


^  It  is  doubtful  in  what  sense  the  author  understands  this  part  of 
the  verse.  Mahidhara  takes  it  to  mean,  '  without  whom  no  body 
moves.' 


IX    KAiVDA,    2    ADHYAYA,     I     BRAHMAA\'\,    2  1.        1 8/ 

Others  than   us!    unto   us   be   thou  bright  and 
propitious!' — as  the  text,  so  the  meaning. 

1 8.  Having  returned  (to  the  hall-fire)  he  proceeds 
with  the  (forenoon  performance  of  the)  Pravargya' 
and  Upasad^  and  having  performed  the  Pravargya 
and  Upasad,  he  hands  to  him  (the  Sacrificer)  the 
fast-food  or  semi-fast-food.  He  then  (proceeds)  with 
the  (afternoon  performance  of  the)  Pravargya  and 
Upasad,  and  having  obtained  the  object  for  which 
he  puts  the  (Pravargya-)  cauldron  on  the  fire,  he 
sets  out  (the  apparatus  of)  the  Pravargya. 

19.  Let  him  set  it  out  on  an  island;  for,  when 
heated,  that  (cauldron)  is  suffering  pain ;  and  were 
he  to  set  it  out  on  this  (earth)  its  pain  would  enter 
this  (earth);  and  were  he  to  set  it  out  on  water,  its 
pain  would  enter  the  water;  but  when  he  sets  it  out 
on  an  island,  then  it  does  not  injure  either  the  water 
or  this  (earth):  in  that  he  does  not  throw  it  into  the 
water,  it  does  not  injure  the  water;  and  in  that  the 
water  goes  all  round  it — water  being  a  means  of 
soothing — it  does  not  injure  this  earth; — let  him 
therefore  set  it  out  on  an  island. 

20.  But  let  him  rather  set  it  out  on  the  fire-altar; — 
for  that  fire-altar  is  these  worlds,  and  the  enclosing- 
stones  are  the  waters; — so  that  when  he  sets  it  out 
on  the  fire-altar,  he  indeed  sets  it  out  on  an  island. 

21.  And,  again,  as  to  w^hy  he  sets  it  out  on  the 
fire-altar; — that  fire-altar  is  these  worlds,  and  those 
Pravargya  (vessels)  are  Agni  (fire),  Vayu  (wind),  and 
Aditya  (sun) :  hence,  were  he  to  set  them  out  in  any 
other  place  than  the  fire-altar,  he  would  place  those 
gods  outside  these  worlds;  but  in  that  he  sets  them 

^  For  the  Pravargya,  see  part  i,  p.  44  note;  and  the  Upasads, 
part  ii,  p.  104  seq. 


1 88  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

out  on  the  fire-altar,  he  places  those  gods  in  these 
worlds. 

2  2.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  sets  it  out  on  the 
fire-altar, — the  Pravargya  is  the  head  of  the  sacrifice, 
and  this  built-up  fire-altar  is  the  body:  hence  were 
he  to  set  it  out  in  any  other  place  than  the  fire-altar, 
he  would  place  that  head  away  from  that  (body),  but 
in  that  he  sets  it  out  on  the  fire-altar,  he,  having  put 
together  that  body  of  him  (Agni),  restores  the  head 
to  it. 

23.  The  first  Pravargya  (vessel)  he  sets  out  close 
to  the  naturally-perforated  (brick); — the  naturally- 
perforated  one  is  the  breath,  and  the  Pravargya  is 
the  head,  and  this  built-up  Agni  is  the  body:  he 
thus  connects  and  puts  together  the  head  and  the 
body  by  means  of  (the  channel  of)  the  breath. 
Having  set  out  the  Pravargya  as  is  the  way 
of  its  setting  out, — 

Second  Brahmatva. 

Leading  forward  of  Agni  to  the  Fire-altar. 

I.  Having  returned  to  the  (Garhapatya^)  in  order 
to  take  forward  the  fire,  he  offers  oblations,  and 
puts  on  pieces  of  firewood.  For  now  that  Agni 
was  about  to  go  forward  (to  the  fire-altar),  the  gods 
regaled  him  with  food,  both  with  oblations  and 
pieces  of  firewood;  and  in  like  manner  does  this 
(Sacrificer),  now  that  he  (Agni)  is  about  to  go  for- 
ward, regale  him  with  food,  both  with  oblations  and 
pieces  of  firewood.  He  takes  (ghee)  in  five  ladlings: 
the  meaning  of  this  has  been  explained. 


^  That  is,  the  newly-built  Garhapatya-hearth  (part  iii,  p.  302)  on 
which  the  Ukhya  fire  has  been  deposited. 


IX    KANDA,    2    ADHYAYA,    2    BRAIIMAA^A,    4.        1 89 


2.  He  then  takes  (ghee)  in  sixteen  ladHngs\ — 
Pra^apati  consists  of  sixteen  parts,  and  Pra^apati  is 
Agni:  he  thus  regales  him  with  food  proportionate 
to  his  body;  and  the  food  which  is  proportionate  to 
the  body  satisfies  and  does  no  injury;  but  that  which 
is  excessive  does  injury,  and  that  which  is  too  httle 
does  not  satisfy.  He  takes  (the  oblations)  in  the 
same  offering-ladle,  for  one  and  the  same  (Agni)  is 
he  whom  he  regales  therewith.  With  two  (verses) 
addressed  to  Vi^-vakarman  he  offers ;  for  this  Agni 
is  Vi^vakarman  (the  all-worker):  it  is  him  he  thereby 
gratifies.  Three  oblations  he  offers, — threefold  is 
Agni :  as  great  as  Agni  is,  as  great  as  is  his  measure, 
with  so  much  food  he  thus  regales  him. 

3.  He  then  puts  on  the  pieces  of  firewood:  this  is 
as  if,  after  regaling  some  one,  one  were  to  attend 
upon  him.  They  are  of  udumbara  (ficus  glomerata) 
wood;  for  the  Udumbara  is  food  and  sap:  with  food 
and  sap  he  thus  regales  him.  They  are  fresh 
(green),  for  that  part  of  trees  which  is  fresh  is  unin- 
jured and  living :  he  thus  regales  him  with  what  is 
uninjured  and  living  in  trees.  They  are  soaked  in 
ghee;  for  ghee  is  sacred  to  Agni:  with  his  own 
portion,  with  his  own  sap  he  thus  regales  him. 
They  remain  the  whole  night  in  it,  for  there  they 
become  imbued  with  sap.  Three  pieces  of  wood  he 
puts  on, — threefold  is  Agni:  as  great  as  Agni  is,  as 
great  as  is  his  measure,  with  so  much  food  he  thus 
regales  him. 

4.  And,  again,  as   to  why  he   offers  those  obla- 
tions;— now  that  he  (Agni)  was  about  to  go  forward, 


'  That  is,  lie  ladles  sixteen  sruva-spoonfuls  of  ghee  into  the  sruX- 


or  offering-ladle. 


igO  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

the  gods  restored  (recruited)  him  beforehand  with 
food,  with  these  oblations;  and  in  Hke  manner  does 
this  (Sacrificer),  now  that  he  (Agni)  is  about  to  go 
forward,  restore  him  beforehand  with  food,  with 
these  oblations. 

5.  He  takes  (ghee)  in  five  ladlings,  for  fivefold 
divided  is  that  vital  air  in  the  head, — the  mind, 
speech,  the  breath,  the  eye,  and  the  ear, — he  thus 
lays  that  fivefold  divided  vital  air  into  this  head. 
[He  offers  it,  with,  Va^.  S.  XVH,  16],  '  Agni,  with 
sharp  flame,  (may  destroy  every  demon  !  Agni 
gaineth  wealth  for  us)'  thus  with  a  (verse)  con- 
taining (the  word)  '  sharp '  :  he  therewith  sharpens 
his  head  so  as  to  become  sharp. 

6.  He  then  takes  (ghee)  in  sixteen  ladlings  :  eight 
vital  airs,  and  eight  limbs \ — this  (the  symbolical) 
amount.  He  takes  it  in  the  same  spoon,  for,  indeed, 
the  vital  airs  and  the  limbs  are  in  the  same  body. 
Separately-  he  offers  :  he  thereby  makes  a  distinc- 
tion between  the  vital  airs  and  the  limbs.  With  two 
(verses)  addressed  to  Vi.?vakarman  he  offers  :  Vii-va- 
karman  is  this  Agni,  It  is  him  he  thus  puts  together. 
Three  oblations  he  offers, — threefold  is  Agni :  as 
great  as  Agni  is,  as  great  as  is  his  measure,  with  so 
much  food  he  thus  restores  him.  With  seventeen 
verses  (he  offers)^, — Pra^apati  is  seventeenfold,  and 
Pra^apati  is  Agni :  as  great  as  Agni  is,  as  great  as 
is  his  measure,  with  so  much  he  thus  restores  him. 


^  Viz.  the  upper  and  fore-arms,  the  thighs  and  legs. 

^  That  is,  he  offers  this  ladleful  (obtained  by  sixteen  ladlings 
with  the  dipping-spoon)  in  two  separate  libations  (ahuti)  or,  accord- 
ing to  Katy.,  in  two  halves. 

^  Viz.  Vao".  S.  XVII,  1 7-32  (sixteen  verses,  eight  for  each  oblation) 
and  verse  16  (given  above)  used  with  the  oblation  of  five  ladlings. 


IX  KANDA,    2    ADHYAVA,  3  BRAHMAA'A,  I.    IQI 

With  (ghee)  taken  in  twenty-one  ladHngs  (he  offers 
the  two  oblations), — there  are  twelve  months,  five 
seasons,  these  three  worlds,  and  yonder  sun  as  the 
twenty-first :  this  is  the  (symbolical)  amount  (or, 
correspondence). 

7.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  puts  the  pieces  of  fire- 
wood on ;  the  gods  having  set  him  up  wholly  and  com- 
pletel)',  now  regaled  him  with  this  food,  these  pieces 
of  firewood  ;  and  in  like  manner  does  this  (Sacrificer), 
now  that  he  has  set  him  up  wholly  and  completely, 
regale  him  with  this  food,  these  pieces  of  firewood. 
They  are  of  udumbara  wood,  and  fresh,  and  remain 
for  a  whole  night  (being)  soaked  in  ghee  :  the  signi- 
ficance of  this  has  been  explained.  [He  puts  them 
on,  with,  Vai,'-.  S.  XVII,  50-52],  'Upwards  lead 
thou  him,  O  Agni ! . . .  Forward  lead  thou  him,  O 
Indra!...  In  whosehousewe  makeo f f e ring...,' 
as  the  text,  so  the  meaning.  Three  pieces  of  firewood 
he  puts  on, — threefold  is  Agni:  as  great  as  Agni  is,  as 
great  as  is  his  measure,  with  so  much  food  he  thus 
regales  him.  Three  oblations  he  offers, — that  makes 
six  :  the  significance  of  this  has  been  explained. 

Third  BRAiiMAiVA. 

I.  He  (the  Adhvaryu)  then  gives  orders  (to  his 
assistant,  the  Pratiprasthatr/),  '  Lift  the  log  ^  !  hold 
up  the  underlayer!' — [To  the  Hot;/],  'Recite  for 

^  Viz.  a  burning  piece  of  wood  taken  from  the  Garhapatya  hearth 
to  serve  as  the  new  Ahavaniya  on  the  great  fire-altar.  The  Gar- 
hapatya fire,  it  will  be  remembered,  was  the  Ukhya  Agni,  or  the 
sacred  fire  carried  in  a  pan  (ukha)  by  the  Sacrificer  during  his  time 
of  initiation  (diksha)  lasting  for  a  year  (or  some  other  definite 
period),  till,  at  the  end  of  that  period,  at  the  beginning  of  the 
Prayawiya,  or  opening-offering,  it  w^as  transferred  from  the  pan  to 
the  newly-built  Gaihapatya  hearth. 


192  .S-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

Agni  as  he  is  taken  forward  ! ' — '  Agnidh,  follow  up 
widi  die  single  sword  (-line)!' — 'Brahman,  mutter 
the  Apratiratha  (hymn) ! ' 

2.  For  at  that  time,  as  the  gods  were  about  to 
come  up  in  order  to  perform  this  sacrifice,  the 
Asuras,  the  mischievous  fiends,  tried  to  smite  them 
from  the  south,  saying,  '  Ye  shall  not  sacrifice !  ye 
shall  not  perform  the  sacrifice  ! ' 

3.  The  gods  said  to  Indra,  'Thou  art  the  highest 
and  mightiest,  and  strongest  of  us  :  do  thou  hold 
those  fiends  in  check ! ' — '  Let  the  Brahman  (n.)  be 
my  ally  ! '  he  said. — '  So  be  it ! '  They  made  Br/has- 
pati  his  ally,  for  B?^z'haspati  is  the  Brahman  (the 
priesthood) ;  and  having  had  the  Asuras,  the  mis- 
chievous fiends,  chased  away  in  the  south  by  Br/has- 
pati  and  Indra,  they  spread  this  sacrifice  in  a  place 
free  from  danger  and  devilry. 

4.  Now  what  the  gods  did  then,  that  is  done  on 
this  occasion.  Those  fiends,  it  is  true,  have  now 
been  chased  away  by  the  gods  themselves,  but  when 
he  does  this,  he  does  so  thinking,  '  I  will  do  what 
the  eods  did ; '  and  havincr  had  the  Asuras,  the 
mischievous  fiends,  chased  away  in  the  south  by 
Indra  and  Br/haspati,  he  performs  this  sacrifice  in 
a  place  free  from  danger  and  devilry. 

5.  As  to  that  Indra,  he  is  that  Apratiratha  (irre- 
sistible hymn) ;  and  as  to  that  Br/haspati,  he  is  the 
Brahman  (priest)  :  thus,  when  the  Brahman  mutters 
the  Apratiratha  (hymn)  he  (the  Sacrificer),  having 
the  Asuras,  the  mischievous  fiends,  chased  away  in 
the  south,  by  Indra  and  B^^'/haspati,  performs  this 
sacrifice  in  a  place  free  from  danger  and  devilry. 
This  is  why  the  Brahman  mutters  the  Apratiratha 
(hymn,  Va^.  S.  XVII,  33-44;  Ri'gv.  S.  X,  103,  1-12). 


IX     KANDA,    2    ADIIYAYA,    3    BRAHMAiVA,    8.         1 93 


6.  '  The  swift  (Indra),  sharpening  (his  weapon), 
like  a  terrible  bull,'— these  are  twelve  suitable 
(verses)  relating  to  Indra,— a  year  consists  of 
twelve  months,  and  Agni  (the  fire-altar)  is  the  year : 
as  great  as  Agni  is,  as  great  as  is  his  measure,  by 
so  much  he  drives  off  the  Asuras,  the  mischievous 
fiends,  in  the  south.  With  trish/ubh^  (verses  he 
does  so),— the  Trish/ubh  is  the  thunderbolt:  by 
the  thunderbolt  he  thus  drives  off  the  Asuras,  the 
mischievous  fiends,  in  the  south.  They  amount  to 
twenty-two  Gayatris\  and  thus  thev  relate  to  Aeni 
for  this  is  Agni's  performance. 

7.  He  then  takes  him  up  (in  the  form  of  a  burning 
piece  of  firewood),  with  [Va^.  S.  XVII,  53],  '  Up- 
wards may  the  All-gods  bear  thee,  O  Agni, 
by  their  thoughts!...'  the  meaning  of  this  has 
been  explained-. 

8.  They  then  go  forward,  with  (Va^.  S.  XVII, 
54-58),  'May  the  divine  regions,  the  goddesses, 
protect  the  sacrifice!' — The  gods  and  the 
Asuras,  both  of  them  sprung  from  Pra^apati,  were 
contending  for  the  regions,  and  the  gods  wrested 
the  regions  from  the  Asuras;  and  in  like  manner 
does  the  Sacrificer  now  wrest  the  regions  from  his 
hateful  rival.  '  Divine '  he  says,  and  thereby  makes 
them  divine  for  himself; — 'may  the  goddesses  pro- 
tect the  sacrifice,'  that  is,  '  may  the  goddesses  protect 
this  sacrifice!' — 'keeping  off  want  and  ill-will,' — 
want  is  hunger:  thus,  'keeping  off  hunger;' — 'grant- 

^  The  trish/ubh  verse  consists  of  4  x  1 1  syllables,  hence  the  twelve 
verses  of  together  528  syllables.  The  gayatrt  verse,  on  the  other 
hand,  consists  of  3  x  8  syllables  ;  and  twenty-two  such  verses  would 
thus  consist  of  altogether  528  syllables. 

2  Viz.  VI,  8,  I,  7. 

[4.1]  0 


J  94  i-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

ing  to  the  lord  of  the  sacrifice  a  share  in  wealth- 
affluence/  that  is,  'granting  to  the  lord  of  the 
sacrifice  a  share  in  wealth  and  in  affluence;'  'may 
the  sacrifice  be  founded  on  wealth-affluence!' 
— that  is,  'may  the  sacrifice  be  founded  on  wealth 
and  affluence ! ' 

9.  '  Glorifying  on  the  kindled  fire,' — the  glori- 
fying one  is  the  Sacrificer; — 'the  hymn-winged,' — 
for  hymns  are  his  wings  ; — '  taken,' — that  is,  'held;' 
— '  praiseworthy,' — that  is,  'worthy  of  worship  ;' — • 
'(when)  they  sacrificed,  encircling  the  heated 
cauldron,' — for  they  did  sacrifice,  whilst  encircling 
the  heated  (Pravargya)  cauldron;  'when  the  gods 
offered  the  sacrifice  with  food,' — for  the  gods 
did  offer  this  sacrifice  with  food. 

10.  .'To  the  divine,  fostering  upholder,' — 
for  he,  Agni,  is  the  divine  upholder,  the  most 
fostering; — 'he,  the  approacher  of  gods,  the 
well-disposed,  of  a  hundred  draughts,' — for  he 
is  indeed  an  approacher  of  the  gods,  and  well-disposed, 
and  possessed  of  a  hundred  draughts; — 'encircling, 
the  gods  drew  nigh  unto  the  sacrifice,' — for 
encircling  him  (Agni),  the  gods  drew  nigh  to  the 
sacrifice; — 'the  gods  stood  ready  to  perform 
the  cult  unto  the  gods,' — the  cult,  doubtless,  is  the 
sacrifice,  thus,  '  the  gods  stood  ready  to  perform 
the  sacrifice  to  the  gods.' 

11.  'The  welcome  oblation  slaughtered  by 
the  slaughterer^  to  sacrifice;' — that  is,  'wished- 
for,  much  wished-for ; ' — 'where  the  fourth  sacri- 
fice goeth  to  the  offering,' — the  Adhvaryu  first 
mutters  the  formulas,  the  Hotrz  afterwards  recites 

^  Mahidhara  takes  '  jamita '  to  stand  for  '  jamitra.' 


IX    KANDA,    2    ADIIYAYA,    3    BRAHMAA^A,     I4.        1 95 

the  verses,  the  Brahman  mutters  the  Apratiratha 
(hymn)  on  the  south  side;  this  (set  of  verses),  then, 
is  the  fourth  sacrifice; — 'may  the  prayers,  the 
blessings  favour  us^'' — that  is,  'may  both  prayers 
and  blessings  favour  us  ! ' 

12.  'The  sun-rayed,  golden-haired  Savitre 
ever  lifted  up^  the  light  in  front,' — this  Agni, 
doubtless,  is  yonder  sun,  and  that  sun-rayed,  golden- 
haired  Savitrz  in  front  ever  lifts  up  that  light ; 
— 'at  his  behest  Pushan  goeth,  the  wise,'  — 
Pushan,  doubtless,  means  cattle,  and  they  indeed 
start  forth  at  his  (Agni-Surya's)  behest ; — '  viewing 
all  beings  as  their  guardian,' — for  he  indeed 
views  everything  here,  and  he  is  the  protector  of 
all  this  world. 

13.  Now,  the  gods  thereby  (viz.  by  these  five 
verses)  wrested  from  the  Asuras  the  five  regions 
which  are  on  this  side  of  yonder  sun,  and  then 
ascended  them ;  and  so  does  the  Sacrificer  now 
wrest  them  from  his  hateful  rival,  and  then  ascend 
them.  And  by  means  of  them  the  gods  reached 
this  place,  and  in  like  manner  does  this  (Sacrificer) 
by  means  of  them  reach  this  place  ^ 

14.  He   then   sets   up  a  variegated    stone; — the 

'  ?  Or,  '  May  they  favour  our  prayers  and  blessings ! '  These 
verses  are  rather  enigmatical. 

^  The  author  of  the  Brahmawa  connects  '  udaya;« '  with  'yam,' 
Mahidhara  with  '  ya '  (udayan  for  udayat). 

^  ?  Or,  reach  //la/  place ;  Saya/za,  in  the  first  instance,  takes  it  to 
mean  '  as  far  as  this  place '  (from  beyond  the  sun  down  to  the  end 
of  the  air) ;  but  in  the  second  instance,  he  takes  it  as  referring  to 
the  particular  spot  on  the  sacrificial  ground  near  which  this  part 
of  the  ceremonial  is  performed,  viz.  the  Agnidhra's  fire-shed  (as 
representing  the  air),  south  of  which  the  Adhvaryu  lays  down  a 
variegated  stone  close  to  the  '  spine.' 

O  2 


196  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAA^A. 

variegated  stone,  doubtless,  is  yonder  sun  :  it  is  thus 
yonder  sun  that  is  set  up.  It  is  variegated,  for  by 
means  of  its  rays  that  disk  is  variegated.  He  sets 
it  up  between  the  Ahavaniya  and  the  Garhapatya  ; 
for  the  Garhapatya  is  this  (terrestrial)  world,  and 
the  Ahavaniya  is  the  sky :  he  thus  places  him  (the 
sun)  between  these  two  worlds,  whence  he  shines 
between  these  two  worlds. 

A 

15.  On  the  Agnidhra  range ^  (he  places  it),  for 
the  Agnidhra's  fire-shed  is  the  air ;  he  thus  places 
it  in  the  air,  whence  that  (sun)  has  the  air  for  his 
seat.  Halfway  (between  the  two  fires  he  places  it)  ; 
for  that  (sun)  is  halfway  from  this  (earth). 

16.  This  (stone)  is  the  breath, — he  thus  puts  the 
breath  into  the  body ;  and  it  is  the  vital  power, — he 
thus  puts  vital  power  into  the  body ;  it  is  food,  for  it 
is  vital  power,  and  vital  power  is  indeed  food.  It  is 
a  stone,  for  a  stone  is  firm :  he  thus  makes  the  vital 
power  firm.  It  is  variegated,  for  food  is  variegated 
(varied). 

17.  He  sets  it  up  (with,  Va^.  S.  XVII,  59,  60), 
'Measuringhe  keeps  in  the  middle  of  the  sky,' 
— for  that  (sun)  indeed  keeps  measuring  in  the  middle 
of  the  sky; — '  filling  the  two  worlds  and  the  air,' 
for  even  in  rising  he  fills  these  (three)  worlds  ; — '  he 
scans  the  all-reaching,  the  butter-reaching,' — 
he  thereby  means  the  offering-ladles  and  the  offering- 
grounds; — 'between  the  front  and  bSck  lights,' 
— that  is,  between  this  world  and  that  one  ;  or  that 
(fire-altar)  which  is  here  at  this  moment  being  built, 
and  that  which  was  there  built  at  first. 

A 

'  That  is,  where  the  Agnidhra  shed  and  hearth  will  afterwards 
have  to  be  erected  (see  IX,  4,  3,  5-6)  on  the  northern  edge  of  the 
Vedi,  midway  between  the  Garhapatya  and  Ahavaniya  fire-places. 


IX  KANDA,    2  ADHYAYA,  3  BRAHMAA^A,  20.    1 97 

18.  '  The  showering  ocean,  the  ruddy  bird,' — 
for  he  (die  sun)  is  indeed  a  showering  ocean,  and 
a  ruddy  bird, — 'hath  entered  the  seat  of  his 
easterly  father,' — for  he  indeed  enters  that  seat  of 
his  easterly^  father; — 'the  many-hued  rock  set  up 
in  the  middle  of  the  sky,' — for  that  variegated 
stone  is  indeed  set  up  in  the  middle  of  the  sky; — 
'hath  traversed  and  guardeth  the  two  ends 
of  the  atmosphere;' — for  in  traversing  he  guards 
the  ends  of  these  worlds. 

19.  With  two  (verses)  he  sets  it  up; — two-footed 
is  the  Sacrificer,  and  the  Sacrificer  is  Agni  :  as  great 
as  Aeni  is,  as  ofreat  as  is  his  measure,  with  so  much 
he  thus  sets  him  (the  sun,  Agni)  up.  With  trish/ubh 
(verses  he  sets  him  up), — for  that  (sun)  is  related 
to  the  Trish/ubh.  He  does  not  'settle'  (the  stone), 
for  unsettled  is  that  (sun);  nor  does  he  pronounce 
the  Sudadohas  over  it ; — the  Sudadohas  means  the 
breath,  and  that  (sun)  is  the  breath,  and  why  should 
he  put  breath  into  (or  on)  the  breath  ?  Having 
deposited  it  in  such  a  way  that  it  is  not  lost ; — 

20.  They  now  approach  (the  fire-altar,  with,  Va^. 
S.  XVII,  61-64),  'They  all  have  magnified 
Indra,' — the  meaning  of  this  has  been  explained  2. 
'Let  the  god-invoking  sacrifice  lead  hither, 
let  the  favour-invoking  sacrifice  lead  hither 
(the  gods)!' — both  god-invoking  and  favour-invoking 
indeed  is  the  sacrifice; — Tet  Agni,  the  god,  make 
offering  and  lead  hither  the  gods  !'  that  is,  'may 


'  Thus  Maliidhara  here  takes  *  purva,'  and  apparenUy  also  the 
author  of  the  Brahmawa ;  the  easterly  father  being  the  Ahavaniya, 
and  hence  the  sky.  In  the  formula  it  would  rather  seem  to  mean 
'  former,  old.' 

^  See  VIII,  7,  3,  7. 


198  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

Agni,  the  god,  both  make  offering  and  bring  hither 
the  gods !' 

21.  'The  creation  of  strength  hath  upheaved 
me  with  upheaval,  and  Indra  hath  laid  low 
mine  enemies  by  subdual,' — as  the  text,  so  the 
meaning. 

22.  'May  the  gods  advance  the  Brahman 
both  by  upheaval  and  subdual ;  and  may  Indra 
and  Aoni  scatter  asunder  mine  enemies!' — as 
the  text,  so  the  meaning. 

23.  Now,  the  gods  thereby  (viz,  by  these  four 
verses)  wrested  from  the  Asuras  the  four  regions 
which  are  above  yonder  sun,  and  then  ascended 
them  ;  and  in  like  manner  does  the  Sacrificer  thereby 
wrest  them  from  his  hateful  enemy,  and  then  ascend 
them.  And  by  means  of  them  the  gods  then  attained 
to  that  place ;  and  in  like  manner  does  this  (Sacri- 
ficer) by  means  of  them  attain  thither. 

24.  They  then  mount  the  fire-altar,  with  (Va^.  S. 
XVII,  65-69),  '  By  Agni  ascend  ye  to  the  firma- 
ment!'— the  firmament,  doubtless,  is  the  heavenly 
world :  thus,  '  by  means  of  this  Agni  (fire-altar) 
ascend  ye  to  that  heavenly  world!' — 'holding  the 
Ukhya  in  your  hands,' — for  the  Ukhya  (the  fire  in 
the  pan)  they  do  hold  in  their  hands  ^; — 'having 
gone  to  the  back  of  the  sky,  to  heaven,  keep  ye 
mingling  with  the  gods!' — that  is,  '  having  gone 
to  the  back  of  the  sky,  to  the  heavenly  world,  keep 
ye  mingling  with  the  gods  ! ' 

^  Viz.  inasmuch  as  the  firebrand  now  being  carried  forward  to 
the  great  fire-altar,  where  it  is  henceforth  to  serve  as  Ahavaniya, 
was  taken  from  the  Garhapatya  fire,  which  itseU"  is  identical  with 
the  Ukhya  Agni,  or  fire  carried  about  by  the  Sacrificer  in  the  Ukha, 
or  pan,  during  his  period  of  initiation.     See  p.  191,  note  i. 


IX    KANDA,    2    ADHYAYA,    3    BRAHMAA^A,    28.        1 99 


25.  'Go  thou  forth  to  the  eastern  quarter, 
knowing!' — the  eastern  quarter,  doubtless,  is  Agni's: 
thus, '  To  thine  own  quarter  go  thou  forth,  l^nowing!' 
— 'be  thou  Agni's  fore-fire  here,  O  Agni!' — 
that  is,  'Of  this  Agni  (/-itya)  be  thou,  O  Agni, 
the  fore-fireM' — 'Shine  thou,  illumining  all 
regions!' — that  is,  'shine  thou,  illuminating  every 
region!' — 'Grant  thou  food  to  our  two-footed 
and  four-footed  one!'  he  thereby  invokes  a 
blessing. 

26.  'From  the  earth  have  I  ascended  the 
air;  from  the  air  have  I  ascended  the  sky;' — 
for  from  the  Garhapatya  they  go  to  the  Agnidhriya, 
and  from  the  Agnidhriya  to  the  Ahavaniya  ; — '  from 
the  sky,  the  back  of  the  firmament,  have 
I  gone  to  heaven,  to  the  light;' — that  is,  'from 
the  sky,  the  back  of  the  firmament,  have  I  gone  to 
the  heavenly  world.' 

27.  '  The  heaven-going  look  not  round,  they 
ascend  the  heaven,  the  two  worlds,' — those  who 
go  to  the  heavenly  world  do  not  indeed  look  round  2; 
'the  wise  who  performed  the  all-sustaining 
sacrifice,' — for  that  sacrifice  is  indeed all-sustainino-^. 
and  they  who  perform  it  are  indeed  wise. 

28.  'Go  forward,  Agni,  first  of  the  godward- 
going,' — he  thereby  says  to  this  Agni  (that  is 
carried  forward),  'Go  thou  forward,  as  the  first  of 
these  godward-going  ones; ' — '  the  eye  of  the  gods 

^  Mahidhara  takes  '  puro  'gni '  in  the  sense  of  fore-goer  (puras 
agre  angali  ga-('X'//ati). 

'^  That  is,  according  to  Mahidhara,  they  think  not  of  their  sons, 
cattle,  &c. 

'  Tims  Mahidhara  takes  '  vijvatodhara  ; '  '  flowing  in  every  direc- 
tion' (vijvato  +  dhara),  St.  Petersb.  Diet. 


200  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

and  of  mortals,' — for  this  (Agni)  is  indeed  the  eye 
of  both  gods  and  men; — 'they  who  love  to  sacri- 
fice together  with  the  Bhrzgus,' — that  is,  'sacri- 
ficing together  with  the  Bhr/gus,' — 'let  the  offerers 
go  unto  heaven,  hail!' — that  is,  '  may  the  offerers 
go  to  the  heavenly  world,  hail ! ' 

29.  Now,  the  gods  thereby  (viz.  by  these  five 
verses)  wrested  from  the  Asuras  the  five  regions 
which  are  in  yonder  world,  and  then  ascended  them; 
and  so  does  the  Sacrificer  thereby  wrest  them  from 
his  hateful  enemy,  and  then  ascend  them.  And  by 
means  of  them  the  gods  attained  thither,  and  so 
also  does  this  (Sacrificer)  by  means  of  them  attain 
thither. 

30.  He  then  makes  offering  on  that  (firebrand); — 
for  now  that  he  (Agni)  had  arrived  the  gods  there- 
upon gratified  him  with  food,  this  oblation  ;  and  in 
like  manner  does  this  (Sacrificer),  now  that  he  (Agni) 
has  arrived,  thereupon  gratify  him  with  food,  this 
oblation.  With  milk  from  a  black  (cow)  which  has 
a  white  calf  (he  makes  offering);  the  black  (cow) 
with  a  white  calf  is  the  night,  and  her  calf  is  yonder 
sun :  he  thus  regales  him  with  his  own  share,  with 
his  own  relish.  On  it  (the  firebrand,  he  offers) 
while  it  is  held  above  (the  naturally-perforated  brick) ; 
for  above  (everything)  is  he  whom  he  thereby  grati- 
fies. By  means  of  the  milk-pail  (he  offers),  for  with 
the  milk-pail  milk  is  given  away. 

31.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  makes  offering  upon 
it.  That  (Ahavaniya)  fire  is  the  head  of  the  sacri- 
fice, and  milk  means  breath  :  he  thus  puts  breath 
into  the  head.  He  should  make  the  offering  so  that 
it  (the  milk)  flows  on  the  naturally-perforated  (brick) ; 
— the  naturally-perforated  one  is  breath,   and   this 


IX    KANDA,    2    ADHYAYA,    3    BRAIIMAiVA,    34.        20I 

(milk)  is  vital  sap:  he  thus  connects  and  puts  to- 
gether the  head  and  the  breath  by  means  of  vital 
sap.  [He  pours  it  out,  with,  Va^.  S.  XVII,  70,  71], 
'  Night  and  Dawn,  of  one  mind,  unlike  in  form,' 
— the  meaning  of  this  has  been  explained \ 

32.  'O  Agni,  thousand-eyed!  —  through  the 
chips  of  gold^  Agni  is  indeed  thousand-eyed; — 
hundred-headed,' — inasmuch  as,  at  that  time^,  he 
was  created  as  the  hundred-headed  Rudra ; — 'thine 
are  a  hundred  out-breathingrs  and  a  thousand 
through-breathings,' — his  indeed  are  a  hundred 
out-breathings  and  a  thousand  through-breathings 
who  is  hundred-headed  and  thousand-eyed; — 'thou 
art  the  master  of  wealth,' — that  is,  '  thou  art  the 
master  of  all  wealth;' — 'to  thee,  our  strength, 
do  we  give  honour!' — he  (Agni)  is  indeed  the 
strength'*:  it  is  him  he  thereby  gratifies. 

33.  With  two  (verses)  he  makes  offering  thereon, — 
two-footed  is  the  Sacrificer,  and  the  Sacrificer  is  Agni : 
as  great  as  Agni  is,  as  great  as  is  his  measure,  with 
so  much  he  thus  makes  offering  to  him. 

34.  He  then  lays  it  (the  firebrand)  down,  with 
(Va^^.  S.  XVII,  72,  73),  'A  well-winged  bird 
thou  art,' — for  on  that  former  occasion  he,  by 
means  of  the  fashioninof-formula,  fashions  him  into 
a  well-winged  bird^;  that  well-winged  bird  he  builds 
up,  and  having  fashioned  that  well-winged  bird,  he 
finally  sets  him  down  ; — 'seat   thee   on   the   back 

'  Viz.  VI,  7,  2,  2.  2  See  jx,  2,  i,  i. 

'  See  IX,  I,  I,  6. 

*  ?  Or,  that  (firebrand)  is  indeed  food  (va^a).  INIahidhara  inter- 
prets this  part  of  the  formula  thus  :  To  thee  do  we  give  food  (va^aya 
for  va^am). 

^  See  VI,  7,  2,  5  scq. 


202  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

of  the  earth,  fill  the  air  with  thy  shine,  prop 
the  sky  with  thy  light,  and  uphold  the  quar- 
ters by  thy  lustre!'  —  for  that  one  (Agni)  indeed 
does  all  this. 

35.  '  Receiving  offering,  kind-faced,  in  front,' 
— that  is,  *  receiving  offering,  kind-faced  for  us,  in 
front;' — 'seat  thee,  O  Agni,  aright  in  thine 
own  seat!' — for  this  (fire-altar)  is  his  (Agni's)  own 
seat:  thus, 'do  thou  rightly  seat  thee  in  it!' — 'in 
this  higher  abode,' — the  higher  abode,  doubtless, 
is  the  sky; — 'sit  ye  down,  the  All-gods  and 
the  Sacrificer!' — he  thus  establishes  the  Sacrificer 
together  with  the  All-gods.  With  two  (verses)  he 
deposits  it :  the  significance  of  this  has  been  ex- 
plained,— with  the  Vasha/-call :  the  significance  of 
this  (will  be  explained)  farther  on. 

36.  He  then  puts  pieces  of  firewood  thereon  ;  for 
now  that  he  (Agni)  had  arrived,  the  gods  thereupon 
gratified  him  with  food,  both  pieces  of  firewood 
and  oblations  ;  and  in  like  manner  does  this  (Sacri- 
ficer), now  that  he  has  arrived,  thereupon  gratify  him 
with  food,  both  pieces  of  wood  and  oblations. 

^tj-  He  first  puts  on  one  of  ^ami-wood  (acacia 
suma).  For  at  that  time,  when  this  oblation  had 
been  offered,  he  (Agni)  was  enkindled  and  blazed 
up.  The  gods  were  afraid  of  him,  lest  he  might 
injure  them.  They  saw  this  j-ami  tree,  and  therewith 
appeased  him;  and  inasmuch  as  they  appeased  (jram) 
him  by  that  ^ami,  it  is  (called)  ^'ami  ;  and  in  like 
manner  this  (Sacrificer)  now  appeases  him  by  means 
of  that  sdiVni  (wood), — just  with  a  view  to  appease- 
ment, not  for  food. 

38.  [He  puts  it  on,  with,  Va^.  S.  XVH,  74],  'I 
desire   the  manifest  favour  of  the  admirable 


IX    KAA^DA,    2    ADHYAYA,    3    BRAHMAiVA,    4O.        2O3 

Savitrz,  enjoyed  by  all  men  ;  that  great  cow  of 
his,  the  thousand-streamed,  teeming  with  milk, 
which  Ka;^va  was  wont  to  milk;' — for  Ka;^va 
indeed  saw  her,  and  she,  the  thousand-streamed, 
milked  him  all  his  wishes  (objects  of  desire);  and  in 
like  manner  does  the  thousand-streamed  one  now 
milk  to  the  Sacrificer  all  his  objects  of  desire. 

39.  He  then  puts  on  one  of  vikahkata  (flacourtia 
sapida)  wood — the  significance  whereof  has  been  ex- 
plained— with  (Vaf.  S.  XVII,  75),  'To  thee  give 
we  honour,  O  Agni,  in  the  highest  home;' — • 
his  highest  home,  doubtless,  is  the  sky; — 'to  thee 
give  we  honour,  in  hymns  of  praise,  in  the 
lower  abode;' — the  lower  abode,  doubtless,  is  the 
air;- — 'the  birth-place  whence  thou  hast  arisen 
do  I  worship,' — that  is,  'this  is  his  (Agni's)  own 
birth-place:  that  I  worship;' — 'on  thee,  when 
kindled,  offerings  are  poured  forth;' — for  when 
he  (the  fire)  is  kindled,  they  make  offerings  on  him. 

40.  He  then  puts  on  one  of  udumbara  (ficus 
glomerata)  wood; — the  Udumbara  means  strength 
and  sap:  with  strength  and  sap  he  thus  gratifies 
him.  It  has  forking  branches^, — forking  branches 
mean  cattle:  with  cattle,  as  food,  he  thus  gratifies 
him.  If  he  cannot  get  one  with  bifurcate  branches, 
let  him  take  up  a  globule  of  sour  curds  and  put  it 
on  (the  wood):  that  globule  of  sour  curds  which 
supervenes  is  a  form  of  cattle.  With  the  vira^ 
(verse,    Va^.    S.   XVII,   76;    7?/g-veda  VII,    i,   3), 

^  Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  XIII,  281,  takes  '  karwakavat '  to  mean  '  one 
that  has  a  knot-hole;'  but  Deva's  explanation,  '  karwako  dvitiya- 
jakhodbheda/^,'  probably  means  nothing  else  than  '  showing  the 
appearance  of  a  second  branch,'  or  '  one  in  which  a  second  branch 
(side  branch)  has  struck  out.' 


204  S-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

'  Kindled,  blaze  forth,  O  Agni,  before  us,  (with 
inexhaustible  flame,  O  youngest!  perpetual 
viands  accrue  unto  thee!)' — he  puts  it  on; — the 
Vira^  means  food:  with  food  he  thus  gratifies  him. 
Three  pieces  of  wood  he  puts  on, — threefold  is 
Agni :  as  great  as  Agni  is,  as  great  as  is  his  measure, 
with  so  much  food  he  thus  gratifies  him. 

41.  He  then  offers  oblations, — this  is  just  as  if, 
after  serving  food  to  some  one,  one  gives  him  some- 
thing to  drink.  With  the  dipping-spoon  (sruva)  he 
offers  the  first  two,  with  the  offering-ladle  (sru/C-)  the 
last  (oblation);  (the  first)  with  (Va^^.  S.  XVII,  77), 
'O  Agni,  may  we,  with  hymns  and  thoughts, 
speed  this  day  this  (sacrifice)  of  thine,  even  as 
a  steed,  as  a  noble,  heart-stirring  deed!' — that 
is,  'whatever  heart  -  stirring  hymn  is  thine,  may 
I  speed  (perform)  that  for  thee.'  With  a  paiikti 
(verse)  he  offers, — of  five  feet  consists  the  Paiiktl,  of 
five  layers  the  fire-altar,  five  seasons  are  a  year, 
and  Agni  is  the  year:  as  great  as  Agni  is,  as  great 
as  is  his  measure,  with  so  much  food  he  thus 
gratifies  him. 

42.  He  then  offers  (the  second  oblation),  the  one 
for  Vi^vakarman, — Vi^vakarman  (the  all-worker)  is 
this  Agni:  it  is  him  he  thereby  gratifies, — with 
(Va^.  S.  XVII,  78), 'Thought  I  offer,  with  mind 
and  ghee,' — that  is,  'The  thought  of  these  (priests 
and  Sacrificer)  I  offer  with  mind  and  ghee; ' — '  that 
the  gods  come  hither,' — that  is,  'that  the  gods 
may  come  hither;'  —  'enjoying  their  offering- 
meal,  the  holy-minded,' — that  is,  the  true-minded; 
— 'to  Vi^vakarman,  the  lord  of  all  existence, 
I  offer,' — that  is,  '  to  that  Vi^vakarman  who  is  the 
lord  of  all  that  here  exists  I  offer  ;' — '  everyday  the 


IX    KANDA,    2    ADHYAYA,    3    BRAHMAiVA,    46.        205 


unimpaired  oblation,' — that  is,  'always  the  unin- 
jured oblation.' 

43.  He  then  offers  a  full  (-spoon)  oblation, — the 
full  means  everything:  with  everything  he  thus 
gratifies  him. 

44.  [He  offers,  with,  V^f.  S.  XVH,  79],  'Thine, 
O  Agni,  are  seven  logs,' — logs  mean  vital  airs,  for 
the  vital  airs  do  kindle  him  ; — 'seven  tongues,' — 
this  he  says  with  regard  to  those  seven  persons  which 
they  made  into  one  person^ — 'seven  J^ishis,' — for 
seven  7?/shis  they  indeed  were; — '  seven  beloved 
seats,' — this  he  says  with  regard  to  the  metres, 
for  his  seven  beloved  seats  are  the  metres  ; — 'seven- 
fold the  seven  priests  worship  thee,' — for  in 
a  sevenfold  way  the  seven  priests  indeed  worship 
him; — 'the  seven  homes,' — he  thereby  means 
the  seven  layers  (of  the  altar) ; — '  fill  thou  ! ' — that 
is,  'generate  thou;' — 'with  ghee,' — ghee  means 
seed  :  he  thus  lays  seed  into  these  worlds; — 'sva- 
ha!' — the  sviha  (hail!)  is  the  sacrifice;  he  thus 
at  once  makes  everything  here  fit  for  sacrifice, 

45.  '  Seven  '  he  says  each  time, — of  seven  layers 
the  fire-altar  consists,  and  of  seven  seasons  the  year, 
and  Agni  is  the  year :  as  great  as  Agni  is,  as  great 
as  is  his  measure,  with  so  much  he  thus  gratifies 
him.  Three  oblations  he  offers, — threefold  is  Agni : 
as  orreat  as  Agni  is,  as  crreat  as  is  his  measure,  with 

o  fc>  '  &  ' 

so  much  food  he  thus  gratifies  him.  Three  logs  he 
puts  on, — that  makes  six  :  the  significance  of  this 
has  been  explained. 

46.  Standing  he  puts  on  the  logs, — the  logs  are 
bones,   and   bones  stand,  so  to   speak.     Sitting  he 

^  See  VI,  I,  I,  I  seq. 


206  i-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAA^A. 

offers  the  oblations, — oblations  are  the  flesh,  and 
the  flesh  sits  (lies),  so  to  speak.  The  logs  are 
inside  (the  fire),  and  the  oblations  outside,  for  the 
bones  are  inside,  and  the  flesh  is  outside. 

47.  Now,  then,  as  to  the  (mystic)  correspondence 
(or,  amount).  Six  he  offers  before  (the  leading 
forward  of  the  fire),  and  six  afterwards ;  with  six 
(formulas)  they  proceed  up  to  the  variegated  stone ; 
with  two  he  lays  down  the  variegated  stone ;  with 
four  they  proceed  as  far  as  the  fire-altar;  with 
five  they  mount  the  fire-altar  :  that  makes  twenty- 
nine,  and  the  oblation  itself  is  the  thirtieth.  With 
two  (verses)  he  deposits  the  fire, — that  makes 
thirty-two,  and  of  thirty-two  syllables  consists  the 
Anush/ubh  :  such,  then,  is  this  Anush/ubh. 

48.  And  this  one  (Anush/ubh)  they  bring  hither 
from  those  three  Anush/ubhs  which  they  make  up 
on  the  Garhapatya^  ;  and  inasmuch  as  they  bring 
this  (therefrom)  hither,  thereby  this  whole  Agni 
(fire-altar)  becomes  completed.  But  now  he  was  not 
yet  fit  to  eat  food  2. 

49.  He  said  to  Agni  ^  '  By  thee  I  will  eat  food  ! ' — 
'So  be  it!'  Hence  it  is  only  when  they  bring  him 
hither,  that  this  (z^'ityagni)  becomes  fit  to  eat  food, 
to  eat  oblations. 

50.  Moreover,  they  say,  '  It  is  Pra^apati  himself 
who  takes  this  (Agni)  as  his  dear  son  to  his  bosom  ; ' 
and  verily,  whosoever  so  knows  this,  takes  thus 
a  dear  son  to  his  bosom. 


'  See  VII,  I,  2,  16-19. 

2  Literally,  he  was  not  equal  thereto  that  he  should  eat  food. 
^  That  is,  the  A'uyagni  (fire-altar)  said  to  the  Agni  (fire)  about  to 
be  led  forward. 


TX    KANDA,    3    ADHYAYA,    T    BRAHMA7VA,    2.  207 


51.  And,  again,  as  to  why  they  bring  it  here, — 
the  Agni  (fire-altar)  which  is  built  up  here  is  the 
same  as  those  seven  persons  which  they  made  into 
one  person  ;  and  that  excellence  and  life-sap  of  them 
which  they  concentrated  above,  that  is  the  fire  which 
they  nov7  bring  here, — hence,  when  they  now  bring 
it  here,  they  concentrate  above  (in  the  head)  that 
excellence  and  life-sap  which  belonged  to  those 
seven  persons, — that  is  his  (Agni's)  head,  and  this 
built-up  fire-altar  is  the  body :  having  thus  com- 
pleted his  body,  he  restores  the  head  to  it. 

Third  Adhyaya.     First  BRAiiMAiVA. 
Installation  and  Consecration  of  Agni. 

1.  He  then  offers  the  Vai^vanara  (cake). 
That  Agni  has  now  been  completely  restored ; 
he  now  is  that  deity,  (Agni)  Vai^vanara  (belonging 
to  all  men) :  to  him  he  offers  this  oblation,  and  by 
the  oblation  he  makes  him  a  deity,  for  for  whatever 
deity  an  oblation  is  prepared  that  is  a  deity,  but  not 
one  for  whom  no  (oblation)  is  prepared.  It  is  one 
of  twelve  potsherds :  twelve  months  are  a  year, 
and  Vaii^vanara  is  the  year. 

2.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  offers  the  Vai^-vanara 
(cake), — it  is  as  the  Vai^vanara  that  he  is  about  to 
produce  that  Agni :  on  that  former  occasion,  at 
the  initiation-offering  \  he  pours  him  out  in  the  form 
of  seed ;    and  what  the  seed  is  like  that  is  poured 

'  Cp.  VI,  6,  I,  6.  Whilst  the  iniliation-offering  of  the  ordinary 
Soma-sacrifice  consists  only  of  a  cake  on  eleven  potsherds  to  Agni 
and  Vish«u,  that  of  the  AgniX-ayana  requires  two  further  oblations, 
viz.  a  cake  on  twelve  potsherds  to  Vai^vanara,  and  a  rice-pap  with 
ghee  to  the  Adityas;  cf.  part  iii,  p.  247  note. 


208  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

into  the  womb,  such  hke  (is  the  child  that)  is  born  ; 
and  inasmuch  as  there  he  pours  out  Vai^vanara  in  the 
form  of  seed,  therefore  he  now  is  born  as  Vaij-vanara. 
Silently^  it  is  (performed)  there,  for  there  seed  (is 
imphed)  in  the  sacrifice,  and  silently  seed  is  infused  ; 
but  distinctly  on  the  present  occasion,  for  distinct 
(manifest)  is  the  seed  when  born. 

3.  Now,  that  Vaii'vanara  is  all  these  worlds  :  this 
earth  is  the  All  (vi^va),  and  Agni  is  its  man  (nara)  ; 
the  air  is  the  All,  and  Vayu  (the  wind)  is  its  man 
(ruler)  ;  the  sky  is  the  All,  and  Aditya  (the  sun)  is 
its  man. 

4.  And  these  worlds  are  the  same  as  this  head, — 
this  (lower  part  of  the  head)  is  the  earth,  the  plants 
(being)  the  hair  of  its  beard  :  this  is  the  All,  and  Agni 
is  Speech,  he  is  the  man.  That  (speech)  is  at  the  top 
thereof,  for  Agni  is  on  the  top  of  this  (earth). 

5.  This  (central  part  of  the  face)  is  the  air,  whence 
it  is  hairless,  for  hairless,  as  it  were,  is  the  air ;  it  is 
this  All,  and  Vayu  (the  wind)  is  the  breath,  he  is 
the  man  ;  he  is  in  the  middle  thereof,  for  the  wind 
is  in  the  middle  of  the  air. 

6.  The  sky  is  the  (upper  part  of  the)  head,  and 
the  stars  are  the  hair;  it  is  the  All,  and  Aditya 
(the  sun)  is  the  eye,  he  is  the  man  :  it  is  in  the 
lower  part  of  the  (upper)  head,  for  the  sun  is  below 
the  sky.  Vai^vanara  is  the  head  thereof,  and  this 
built-up  Agni  (the  altar)  is  the  body  :  thus,  having 
completed  his  body,  he  restores  the  head  thereto. 

7.  He  then  offers  the  (cakes)  to  the  Maruts; — 


'  Or,  rather,  in  a  low  voice,  the  name  of  the  deity  being  pro- 
nounced in  an  undertone  while  the  oblation  is  poured  into  the  fire  ; 
see  VI,  6,  i,  11.  No  special  formula  is,  however,  used  on  either 
occasion. 


IX    KANDA,    3    ADHYAVA,     I     BRAHMAA^A,     II.        209 

the  Maruts'  (cakes)  are  the  vital  airs  :  he  thus  puts 
the  vital  airs  into  him  (Agni).  [He  does  so]  after 
offering  the  Vai.?vanara  ;  for  the  Vaij"vanara  is  the 
head:   he  thus  puts  vital  airs  into  the  head. 

8.  That  (Vai^vanara  oblation)  is  a  single  one,  for 
single,  as  it  were,  is  the  head  ;  the  others  (viz.  the 
Marutas)  are  seven  in  number,  of  seven  potsherds 
each;  and  though  'seven-seven'  means  'many 
times,'  here  it  is  onlj^  seven  ^  :  he  thus  places  seven 
vital  airs  in  the  head. 

9.  That  (Vaij-vanara  oblation)  is  (performed  in  a) 
distinct  (voice),  for  the  head  is  distinct;  but  indis- 
tinct the  other  (oblations),  for  indistinct,  as  it  were, 
are  the  vital  airs.  Standing  he  offers  the  former, 
for  the  head  stands,  so  to  speak;  sitting  the  others, 
for  the  vital  airs  are,  so  to  speak,  seated. 

10.  Now,  the  first  two  Maruta  (oblations)  he  offers 
are  these  two  vital  airs  (in  the  ears) :  he  offers  them 
in  the  middle-  of  the  Vaii"vanara  (oblations),  for 
these  two  vital  airs  are  in  the  middle  of  the  head. 

1  I.   And  the  second  pair  are  these  two  (vital  airs 

^  See  VIII,  I,  I,  2.  Also  VI,  5,  3,  11,  where  the  translation 
should  be  altered  accordingly. 

^  In  baking  the  cakes,  the  Vaiivanara  is  placed  on  the  centre  of 
the  fire,  and  the  first  two  Maruta  cakes  are  placed  north  and  south 
of  it,  then  the  following  pair  of  cakes  behind  the  first,  hut  more 
closely  together,  and  behind  these  the  third  pair,  still  more  closely 
together,  and  finally  the  last  cake  forming,  as  it  were,  the  apex 
of  a  j)halanx  of  Maruta  cakes  (or  wind-deities)  protecting  (that  of) 
Agni  Vaijvanara.  In  offering  the  cakes  a  similar  method  is  to  be 
followed  ;  except  that  the  first  pair  of  IMaruta  cakes  may  be  offered, 
not  in  the  fire  itself,  but  on  the  previously  flattened  out  Vaijvanara 
cake  lying  on  the  fire.  Whilst  the  Katiya-sutra  (XVIII,  4,  23) 
admits  this  as  an  alternative  mode  (though  not  very  clearly  ex- 
pressed), our  passage  seems  to  require  it  as  the  only  possible  mode. 
Both  the  Vaijvanara  and  the  IMaruta  cakes  are  offered  whole. 

[43]  P 


2  1  O  S'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

in  the  eyes) ;    he  offers  them  closer   together,   for 
closer  together,  as  it  were,  are  these  two  vital  airs. 

1 2.  And  the  third  pair  are  these  two  (vital  airs 
in  the  nostrils).  He  offers  them  closer  together, 
for  closer  together,  as  it  were,  are  these  two  vital 
airs.  The  one  to  be  recited  in  the  forest  ^  is  speech: 
it  is  to  be  recited  in  the  forest,  for  by  speech  one 
gets  into  much  terrible  (trouble). 

13.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  offers  the  Vai^vanara 
and  Marutas, — the  Vaii'vanara  is  the  ruling  power 
(chieftaincy),  and  the  Marutas  are  the  clan  :  he  thus 
sets  up  both  the  chief  and  the  clan.  The  Vaii"vanara 
he  offers  first :  thus,  having  set  up  the  chief,  he  sets 
up  the  clan. 

14.  The  former  is  a  single  (oblation)  :  he  thus 
makes  the  ruling  power  (chieftaincy)  to  attach  to 
a  single  (person),  and  (social)  distinction  to  attach 
to  a  single  (person).  The  others  are  numerous  :  he 
thus  bestows  multiplicity  on  the  clan. 

15.  The  former  is  (offered  in  a)  distinct  (voice), 
for  the  ruling  power  is  something  distinct,  so  to 
speak ;  and  the  others  are  indistinct,  for  indistinct, 
so  to  speak,  is  the  clan.  Standing  he  offers  the 
former,  for  the  ruling  power  (the  chief)  stands,  so 
to  speak  ;  and  sitting  (he  offers)  the  others,  for  the 
clan  sits,  so  to  speak. 

16.  The  former  he  offers  with  the  offerino^-ladle, 


^  '  Ara;/ye  I  nfi/'ya '  is  the  technical  term  applied  to  the  odd,  or 
seventh,  Maruta  oblation.  According  to  Saya^za  it  is  so  called 
after  an  anuvaka  of  the  Sawhita,  to  be  recited  only  in  the  forest. 
Possibly,  however,  it  is  to  the  particular  formula  (Va^.  S.  XXXIX, 
7),  also  called  '  vimukha '  (?  to  be  pronounced  'with  averted  face'), 
and  containing  the  names  of  the  seven  most  terrible  IMaruts,  that 
the  name  applies. 


IX    KANDA,    3    ADIIYAYA,     I    BRAHMAiVA,    2  1.        211 


when  the  Vasha/  is  uttered,  with  both  an  invitatory 
formula  (anuvakya)  and  an  offering-formula  (yafya); 
with  the  hand  the  others  sitting,  with  the  Svaha-call : 
he  thus  makes  the  clan  subservient  and  obedient  to 
the  chieftain. 

17.  As  to  this  they  say,  '  How  do  these  (Maruta 
oblations)  also  come  to  be  offered  for  him  by  the 
offering-ladle,  at  the  Vasha/-call,  and  with  invitatory 
and  offering  formulas  ? '  Well,  the  first  three  feet 
of  those  seven-footed  Maruta  (verses),  being  a 
three-footed  Gayatri,  are  the  invitatory  formula, 
and  the  last  four,  being  a  four-footed  Trish^ubh,  are 
the  offering-formula.  The  one  is  the  bowl,  and 
the  other  the  handle  (of  the  offering-ladle),  and  the 
Svaha-call  is  the  Vasha^call :  in  this  way,  then, 
these  (Maruta  oblations)  also  become  offered  for 
him  by  the  offering-ladle,  at  the  Vasha^call,  and 
with  invitatory  and  offering-formulas. 

18.  And  the  first  Maruta  (cake)  which  he  offers 
on  the  right  (south)  side,  is  the  seven  (rivers)  which 
flow  eastwards.  It  is  one  of  seven  potsherds,  for 
there  are  seven  of  those  (rivers)  which  flow  east- 
wards. 

19.  And  the  first  (cake)  which  he  offers  on  the 
left  (north)  side,  is  the  seasons  ;  it  is  one  of  seven 
potsherds,  for  there  are  seven  seasons. 

20.  And  the  second  (cake)  which  he  offers  on  the 
right  side,  is  animals  ;  it  is  one  of  seven  potsherds, 
for  there  are  seven  domestic  animals.  He  offers  it 
close  to  the  preceding  one  (representing  the  rivers) : 
he  thus  settles  animals  near  water. 

2T.  And  the  second  (cake)  which  he  offers  on  the 
left  side,  is  the  seven  7?zshis ;  it  is  one  of  seven 
potsherds,  for  the  seven  7?/shis  are  seven  in  number. 

p  2 


2  I  2  .yATAPATHA-BRAHMAiNTA. 

He   offers  it  close  to  the   preceding  one :    he  thus 
establishes  the  seven  7?/shis  in  the  seasons. 

2  2.  And  the  third  (cake)  which  he  offers  on  the 
right  side,  is  the  vital  airs ;  it  is  one  of  seven  pot- 
sherds, for  there  are  seven  vital  airs  in  the  head. 
He  offers  it  close  to  the  preceding  one  :  he  thus 
puts  the  vital  airs  so  as  to  be  close  to  (not  separated 
from)  the  head. 

23.  And  the  third  (cake)  which  he  offers  on  the 
left  side,  is  the  metres  ;  it  is  one  of  seven  potsherds, 
for  there  are  seven  metres  increasing  by  four 
(syllables  respectively).  He  offers  it  close  to  the 
preceding  one  :  he  thus  places  the  metres  close  to 
the  7?/shis. 

24.  And  the  Ara;^ye^nu/^ya  is  the  seven  (rivers) 
which  flow  westwards  ;  it  is  one  of  seven  potsherds, 
for  there  are  seven  of  those  (rivers)  which  f^ow 
westwards.  It  is  that  downward  vital  air  of  his. 
That  Ara/^ye^nu/'ya  belongs  to  this  Pra^apati ;  for 
the  forest  (ara;^ya)  is,  as  it  were,  concealed,  and 
concealed,  as  it  were,  is  that  downward  vital  air ; 
whence  those  who  drink  of  these  (downward  flowing) 
rivers  become  most  vile,  most  blasphemous,  most 
lascivious  in  their  speech.  Whenever  he  here  speaks 
of  them  as  belonoino-  to  the  Maruts,  he  makes  them 
food  for  him  (Agni)  ^  and  offers  it  to  him,  and 
gratifies  him  thereby. 

25.  That  Vaii-vanara  (cake),  doubtless,  is  yonder 
sun,  and  the  Maruta  (cakes)  are  those  rays.  They 
are  of  seven  potsherds  each,  for  the  troops  of  the 
Maruts  consist  of  seven  each. 

*  Probably,  inasmuch  as  the  Maruts  (and  ihe  Maruta  oblations) 
represent  the  clansmen  who  are  considered  the  legitimate  'food' 
or  the  chief,  Agni  Vaijvanara. 


TX    KANDA,    3    ADHYAYA,    2    BRAHMAiVA,    2.  21  3 


26.  He  offers  (the  first  Maruta  cake),  with  (Va^. 
S.  XVII,  80),  'The  clear-lighted,  and  the  bright- 
lighted,  and  the  true-lighted,  and  the  light, 
and  the  clear,  and  the  law-observing,  and  the 
sinless  one  ! ' — these  are  their  names  :  having  com- 
pleted that  disk  (of  the  sun,  in  the  shape  of  the 
Vaiw^nara),  he  bestows  those  rays  on  it  by  calling 
them  by  their  names. 

Second  Brahmaa^a. 
The  Showkr  of  Wealth  and  other  Oblations. 

1.  Thereupon'  he  (the  Sacrificer -)  offers  the 
Vasor  dhara  That  whole  Agni  has  now  been 
completed,  and  he  is  here  the  Vasu  (good  one) :  to 
that  Vasu  the  gods  offered  this  shower  (dhara), 
whence  it  is  called  '  Vasor  dhara  ^ ; '  and  in  like 
manner  this  (Sacrificer)  offers  to  him  this  shower, 
and  gratifies  him  thereby. 

2.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  offers  the  '  Vasor 
dhara;'— this   is  his  (Agni's)  Abhisheka^    for  the 


'  That  is,  after  offering  all  the  seven  Maruta  cakes,  the  formulas 
of  the  last  six  of  which  (Vag.  S.  XVII,  81-85  ;  XXXIX,  7)  are  not 
given  in  the  Bral)ma«a.  At  the  end  the  Adhvaryu  mutters  the 
verse  XVII,  86,  and  thereupon  he  either  makes  the  Sacrificer  mutter 
(or  mutters  himself)  verses  87-99  i"  praise  of  Agni.     Katy.  .S'r. 

xvm,  4,  25;  26. 

2  Thus,  according  to  Katy.  XVIII,  5,  i  (the  Adhvaryu,  according 
to  Weber,  Ind.  Siud.  XIII,  p.  283). 

^  It  would  rather  seem  to  mean  '  stream,  or  shower,  of  wealth ; 
of.  paragraph  4. 

*  That  is,  the  consecration  ceremony,  in  which  the  king  is 
'sprinkled'  wiih  sacred  water,  or,  so  to  speak,  anointed.  The 
'Vasor  dhara,'  or  'shower  of  wealth,'  consisting  of  an  uninter- 
rupted series  of  401  libations  to  Agni  (through  which  all  the  powers 
of  the  god  are  to  be  secured  to  the  Sacrificer),  is  intended  as  the 


214  5'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 


o-ods,  having  now  completed  him  wholly  and  entirely, 
showered  upon  him  those  wishes  (or,  objects  of 
desire),  this  '  Vasor  dhara ; '  and  in  like  manner 
does  this  (Sacrificer),  now  that  he  has  completed 
him  wholly  and  entirely,  shower  upon  him  those 
wishes,  this  'Vasor  dhara.'  With  ghee  taken  in 
five  ladlings,  and  an  offering-ladle  of  udumbara 
wood  (he  offers) :  the  significance  of  this  has  been 
explained. 

3.  [He  offers  it]  after  offering  the  Vai^vanara 
(cake) — for  the  Vai^vanara  is  the  head,  and  food  is 
taken  in  from  the  head  (downwards)  ;  and,  besides, 
it  is  from  the  head  (downwards)  that  he  who  is 
anointed  is  anointed  ; — and  after  offering  the  Ma- 
ruta  (cakes),  for  the  Marutas  are  the  vital  airs,  and 
through  (the  channels  of)  the  vital  airs  food  is 
eaten;  and,  besides,  it  is  at  (the  openings  of)  the 
vital  airs  that  he  who  is  anointed  is  anointed  ^ 

4.  And,  furthermore,  (it  is  offered)  upon  the  Ara- 
/^ye  Miu/C'ya  - ;  for  the  Ara/^ye^niU'ya  is  speech,  and 
it  is  through  (the  channel  of)  speech  that  food  is 
eaten  ;  and,  besides,  it  is  with  speech  that  he  who 

equivalent  of  that  ceremony  for  the  consecration  of  Agni  as  king  ; 
and,  indeed,  as  a  kind  of  superior  consecration  ceremony  for  the 
(royal)  Sacrificer  himself,  more  potent  than  the  Ra^asuya  and 
Va^apeya.  There  is  thus  to  be  noticed  here  the  same  tendency 
as  elsewhere  of  exalting  the  efficacy  of  the  Agni/t'ayana,  and  of 
making  it  take  the  place  of  the  whole  of  the  ordinary  sacrificial 
ceremonial. 

1  When  anointed,  or  consecrated,  the  king  is  first  sprinkled  from 
the  front  and  then  from  behind,  and  finally  rubbed  all  over,  with  the 
consecrated  water;  see  V,  4,  2,  i  seq. 

2  That  is,  as  soon  as  the  Adhvaryu  has  put  the  Ara«ye  ^  nij/('ya 
cake  in  the  fire  the  Sacrificer  begins  to  pour  the  ghee  on  it  with 
a  large  oftering-ladle  of  udumbara  wood,  and  the  Adhvaryu  begins 
to  mutter  the  formulas. 


IX    KANDA,    3    ADHYAYA,    2    BRAHMAiVA,    7.  215 

is  anointed  is  anointed.  And  everything  here  is 
wealth  (vasu),  for  all  these  (cake-offerings)  are  (con- 
nected with  special)  wishes  ^ ;  and  in  order  that  this 
shower,  be  it  of  milk  or  of  ghee,  (may  be)  fraught 
with  wealth,  this  oblation  of  ghee  is  thus  offered  for 
the  beeinninof ;  and  inasmuch  as  this  shower  is 
frauciht  with  wealth,  it  is  called  '  shower  of  wealth.' 

5.  He  (as  it  were)  says,  '  This  is  mine,  and  that  is 
mine  ;' — that  is,  '  Herewith  I  gratify  thee,  and  there- 
with ; — herewith  I  anoint  thee,  and  therewith  ; '  or, 
'  Give  me  this,  and  that ! '  And  as  soon  as  that 
shower  reaches  the  fire,  that  prayer  is  fulfilled. 

6.  Now  the  gods,  having  gratified  him  (Agni)  by 
this  food,  or  by  these  objects  of  desire^,  and  having 
anointed  him  by  this  shower  of  wealth,  solicited  from 
him  these  objects  of  desire  ^ ;  and  having  received 
offering,  and  being  gratified  and  anointed,  he  granted 
them  these  objects  of  desire  ;  and  in  like  manner 
this  (Sacrificer),  having  gratified  him  by  this  food, 
and  by  these  offerings  of  desire,  and  anointed  him 
with  this  shower  of  wealth,  now  solicits  from  him 
these  objects  of  desire  ;  and  having  received  offering, 
and  being  gratified  and  anointed,  he  (Agni)  grants 
him  these  objects  of  desire.  In  order  to  avoid 
discontinuance,  he  each  time  embraces  two  wishes, — 
even  as  one  would  connect  those  living  away  from 
one  another, — thinking,  '  In  this  way  shall  they 
prosper  by  sacrifice  ! ' 

7.  The  gods  now  spake,  '  Through  whom  shall 
we  receive  these  objects  of  desire  ? ' — '  By  our  own 


'  Or,  all  these  (objects)  for  which  offerings  are  made  are  objects 
of  desire. 

■^  Or,  perhaps,  '  for  (prompted  by)  these  objects  of  desire.' 
^  Or,  asked  him  these  wishes  (boons). 


2  I  6  5'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 


self,'  they  said  ;  for  the  sacrifice  is  the  self  of  the 
gods,  and  so  is  the  sacrifice  that  of  the  Sacrificer ; 
and  when  he  says,  *  By  the  sacrifice  they  shall 
prosper ! '  he  means  to  say,  '  By  my  own  self  they 
shall  prosper ! ' 

8.  In  twelve  (things)  he  causes  them  to  prosper  \ 
the  year  consists  of  twelve  months,  and  Agni  is  the 
year  :  as  great  as  Agni  is,  as  great  as  is  his  measure, 
by  so  much  food  he  thus  gratifies  him,  and  by  so 
much  food  he  thus  consecrates  him.  In  fourteen  he 
causes  them  to  prosper ;  in  eight  he  causes  them  to 
prosper ;  in  ten  he  causes  them  to  prosper ;  in 
thirteen  he  causes  them  to  prosper. 

9.  He  then  offers  the  Ardhendra  (libations)'-; — 
the  ardhendras  are  everything  here  ^ :  he  thus  grati- 
fies him  (Agni)  with  everything,  and  with  everything 
he  thus  consecrates  him. 

10.  He  then  offers  (the  libations  relating  to)  the 
Grahas*;' — the  grahas  (cups   of  soma,  offered  to 

^  That  is,  he  makes  the  objects  of  desire  mentioned  in  the  formulas 
used  during  the  Vasor  dhara,  accrue  to  himself,  or  turn  out  well  for 
himself.  The  formulas  usually  contain  the  names  of  twelve  such 
objects  (in  six  pairs),  those  in  XVIII,  i  being—'  (may)  strength 
and  gain,  endeavour  and  attempt,  thought  and  wisdom,  sound  and 
praise,  fame  and  hearing,  light  and  heaven,  prosper  for  (or  accrue 
to)  me  by  sacrifice!'  In  XVIII,  4,  however,  fourteen  objects  are 
enumerated,  in  XVIII,  15  (and  27)  eight,  in  XVIII,  23  (and  26) 
ten,  in  XVIII,  28  thirteen. 

2  Literally,  'the  half-Indra  ones,'  the  technical  term  for  the 
formulas  of  three  sets  of  libations  (XVIII,  16-18),  in  which  three 
sets  of  twelve  deities  are  named,  each  pair  of  whom  consists  of 
Indra  coupled  with  some  other  deity,  thus  '  May  Agni  and  Indra, 
Soma  and  Indra,  &c.,  prosper  for  (or  accrue  to)  me  by  sacrifice  ! ' 

^  Viz.  inasmuch  as  Indra  represents  the  ruling  power,  and  every- 
thing submits  to  him  (III,  9,  4,  15);  or  inasmuch  as  Indra  and 
Agni  are  the  whole  universe  (IV,  2,  2,  14). 

*  These  are  three  sets  of  libations  (still  forming  part  of  the  con- 


IX    KANDA,    3    ADHYAYA,    3    BRAIlMAiVA,    3.  21  7 


the  deities),  doubtless,  are  sacrifice :  by  sacrifice,  by 
food,  he  thus  gratifies  him  ;  and  by  sacrifice  he  thus 
consecrates  him. 

Third  BuAHMAiVA. 

1.  He  then  offers  these  Ya^f  ;'2akratus  ^  (sacri- 
ficial rites),  with, '  May  the  Agni  and  the  Gharma 
(prosper)  for  me  ! ' — by  these  sacrificial  rites  he  thus 
gratifies  him,  and  by  these  sacrificial  rites  he  thus 
consecrates  him. 

2.  He  then  offers  (the  libations  relating  to)  the 
Uneven  Stomas-;— for  the  gods,  having  now  ob- 
tained their  desires,  by  means  of  the  uneven  Stomas 
went  up  to  heaven  ;  and  in  like  manner  does  the 
Sacrificer,  now  that  he  has  obtained  all  his  desires, 
by  means  of  the  uneven  Stomas  go  up  to  heaven. 

3.  Now  this  (set  runs)  up  to  the  thirty-three- 
versed  (hymn-form),  for  the  Trayastriw.^a  is  the  last 
of  the  uneven  Stomas:    at  the  last  the  gods  thus 


tinuous  'Vasor  dhara,'  or  '  weallh-stream'),  the  formulas  of  whicli 
(XVllI,  19-21)  enumerate  each  six  pairs  of  cui)S  of  Soma  (giaha) 
and  of  sacrificial  implements. 

^  These  are  two  sets  of  libations  in  the  formulas  of  which 
(XVIII,  22;  23)  objects  connected  with  'special  sacrifices'  are 
enumerated.  Thus,  of  the  first  pair,  '  Agni  and  Gharma,'  '  Agni,' 
according  to  Mahidhara,  represents  either  the  AgniX-ayana  or  the 
Agnish/oma  (ordinary  Soma-sacrifice) ;  whilst  the  '  Gharma  (caul- 
dron) '  stands  for  the  Pravargya  offering  (part  i,  p.  44  note). 

2  The  formula  of  this  set  of  libations  (XVllI,  24)  enumerates 
the  seventeen  uneven  numbers  (in  the  feminine  gender)  from  i  to 
33,  repeating  the  second  number  of  each  pair,  so  as  to  be  the  first 
number  of  the  next  pair  (thus,  i  and  3,  3  and  5,  &c.).  These 
numbers  are  meant  to  represent  the  corresponding  Stomas,  con- 
sisting of  an  uneven  number  of  verses,  up  to  the  Trayastriwja,  or 
thirty-three-versed  hymn-form. 


2  I  8  S-ATAPATH A-BR AHM AiV A . 


went  Up  to  heaven  ;    and  in  like  manner  does  the 
Sacrificer  thereby  at  the  last  go  up  to  heaven. 

4.  He  then  offers  (those  relating  to)  the  Even 
(Stomas)^ ; — for  the  metres  then  said,  '  The  uneven 
stomas  are  worn  out,  by  means  of  the  even  ones 
we  will  go  up  to  heaven  ! '  By  means  of  the  even 
stomas  they  went  up  to  heaven  ;  and  in  like  manner 
does  the  Sacrificer  thus,  by  means  of  the  even 
stomas,  go  up  to  heaven. 

5.  This  (set  runs)  up  to  the  forty-eight-versed 
(hymn-form),  for  the  Ash^a/'atvari7;/i-a  is  the  last  of 
the  even  stomas  :  at  the  last  the  metres  thus  went 
up  to  heaven ;  and  in  like  manner  does  the  Sacri- 
ficer thereby  at  the  last  go  up  to  heaven. 

6.  He  says,  'May  the  One  and  the  Three 
(prosper)  for  me!' — 'May  the  P'^our  and  the 
Eight  (prosper)  for  me!' — even  as  one  climbing 
a  tree  would  climb  up  by  taking  hold  of  an  ever 
higher  branch,  so  is  this.  And  as  to  why  he  offers 
the  Stomas, — the  stomas  are  food :  it  is  with  food 
he  thus  consecrates  him. 

7.  He  then  offers  (the  libations  relating  to)  the 
Age-grades^  (of  cattle), — age-grades  mean  cattle: 
it   is  by  cattle,  for  his  food,  that  he  thus  gratifies 


^  The  formula  of  this  set  of  libations  (XVIII,  25)  enumerates 
the  twelve  quadruples  of  4  (in  the  feminine  gender),  from  4  to  48 
(again  repeating  each  number,  except  the  first  and  last),  as  repre- 
senting the  Stomas  consisting  of  an  even  number  of  verses,  up  to 
the  Ash/a,('atvari»2ja,  or  forty-eight-versed  hymn-form. 

2  The  two  formulas  relating  to  these  two  sets  of  libations  (XVHI, 
26  ;  27)  contain  respectively  five  and  four  pairs  of  teams  of  cattle 
of  different  ages,  beginning  with  '  tryavi  and  tryavi/  '  an  eighteen- 
months  bull  and  an  eighteen-months  cow;'  and  ending  with  'a 
bullock  and  a  milch  cow.' 


IX    KANDA,    3    ADHYAYA,    3    BRAIIMAiVA,     II.        2ig 


him  ;  and  by  cattle,  for  his  food,  he  thus  consecrates 
him. 

8.  He  then  offers  whilst  mentioning-  names  \- — 
for  the  orods,  havino-  obtained  all  their  wishes,  now 
gratified  him  directly  ;  and  in  like  manner  does  the 
Sacrificer,  having  obtained  all  his  wishes,  now  gratify 
him  directly.  'To  Strength,  hail!  to  Gain, 
hail!' — these  are  his  (Agni's)  names:  it  is  by 
mentioning  his  names  that  he  thus  gratifies  him. 

9.  There  are  thirteen  of  these  names, — a  year 
consists  of  thirteen  months,  and  the  layers  and 
fillings  of  the  fire-altar  amount  to  thirteen  :  as  great 
as  Ag-ni  is,  as  ereat  as  is  his  measure,  with  so  much 
he  thus  gratifies  him.  And  as  to  why  he  offers 
while  mentioning  names, — it  is  thus  in  mentioning 
his  (Agni's)  names  that  he  consecrates  him. 

10.  He  then  says,  '  This  is  thy  realm  ;  a  sup- 
porter and  sustainer  art  thou  for  the  friend: 
for  sustenance,  for  rain,  for  the  lordship  of 
creatures  (do  I  consecrate)  thee;'  —  sustenance, 
doubtless,  means  food,  and  rain  means  food :  by 
food  he  thus  gratifies  him. 

11.  And  when  he  says,  'This  is  thy  realm;  a 
supporter  and  sustainer  art  thou  for  the  friend  :  for 
sustenance,  for  rain,  for  the  lordship  of  creatures — 
thee  ! '  this  is  to  say,  '  This  is  thy  kingdom  ;  thou 
art  consecrated  (anointed)!  thou  art  thy  friend's 
supporter  and  sustainer :  for  our  sustenance  art 
thou,  for  rain  unto  us  art  thou,  for  our  lordship  of 

^  This  set  of  thirteen  libations  (XVIII,  28)  is  offered  to  the 
months  Va^a,  Prasava,  &c.,  here  apparently  considered  as  mani- 
festations of  Agni  (the  year).  Each  name  is  followed  by  '  svaha 
(hail!);'  and  the  last  of  these  dedicatory  formulas  is  followed  by 
the  special  benedictory  formula,  referred  to  in  paragraph  10. 


2  20  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 


creatures  art  thou ! '  They  thereby  entreat  him, 
'  For  all  this  art  thou  unto  us  :  for  all  this  have  we 
consecrated  thee ! '  And  therefore  people  thus 
entreat  a  human  king  who  has  been  consecrated. 

12.  He  then  offers  the  Prospering^  (libations) ; — 
the  prospering  (libations)  are  the  vital  airs  :  it  is  the 
vital  airs  he  thus  puts  into  him.- — '  May  the  vital 
strength  prosper  by  sacrifice!  may  the  vital 
air  prosper  by  sacrifice!  .  .  .'  He  thus  puts 
proper  vital  airs  into  him. 

13.  Twelve  prospering  (libations)  he  offers, — a 
year  consists  of  twelve  months,  and  Agni  is  the 
year  :  as  great  as  Agni  is,  as  great  as  is  his  measure, 
by  so  much  he  thus  puts  proper  vital  airs  into  him. 
And  as  to  why  he  offers  the  prospering  (libations), — 
the  prospering  (libations)  are  vital  airs,  and  the  vital 
airs  are  the  immortal  element :  with  the  immortal 
element  he  thus  consecrates  him. 

14.  He  then  says,  'The  Stoma,  and  the  Ya^us, 
and  the  i?/k,  and  the  Saman,  and  the  Brz'hat, 
and  the  Rathantara,' — this,  doubtless,  is  the  triple 
science,  and  the  triple  science  is  food  :  it  is  with 
food  he  thus  gratifies  him,  and  with  food  he  thus 
consecrates  him; — 'to  the  heavenly  light  we 
ofods  have  Qrone,  we  have  become  immortal,' — 
for  he  indeed  goes  to  the  heavenly  light,  and  be- 
comes immortal; — '  Pra^apati's  children  have 
we  become!' — for  he  indeed  becomes  Pra^apati's 
child, — 've/!    svaha!' — the  Ve^-call,   doubtless,   is 


^  This  final  set  of  twelve  (?  sixteen)  libations  is  called  thus  (kalpa), 
because,  in  the  formulas  used  with  them  (Va^.  S.  XVIII,  29),  the 
verb  '  k//p  (to  prosper,  to  be  right  and  proper) '  is  repeated  each 
time.  At  the  conclusion  of  these  twelve  formulas  the  priest  mutters 
the  final  benediction  given  in  full  in  paragraph  14. 


IX    KANDA,    3    ADHYAVA,    3    BRAIIMAiVA,    l8.        22  1 


esoterically  the  same  as  the  Vasha/-call,  and  either 
with  the  Vasha/-call,  or  the  Svaha-call  is  food  oftered 
to  the  gods  :  he  thus  gratifies  him  by  both  the 
Vasha/  and  the  Svaha,  and  also  consecrates  him  by 
both  of  them.  He  now  throws  the  offering-ladle 
after  (the  ghee  into  the  fire)  lest  what  there  is 
anointed   with   ghee   should   remain   outside   of  the 

fire. 

15.  Now  as  to  this  same  shower  of  wealth,  the 
body  (from  which  it  flows)  is  the  sky,  the  udder 
the  cloud,  the  teat  the  lightning,  and  the  shower  (of 
ghee)  is  the  (rain-)  shower :  from  the  sky  it  comes 
to  the  cow. 

16.  Its  body  is  the  cow,  its  udder  the  (cow's) 
udder,  its  teat  the  (cow's)  teat,  its  shower  the  shower 
(of  milk)  :  from  the  cow  (it  comes)  to  the  Sacrificer. 

17.  Its  body  is  the  Sacrificer,  its  udder  his  arm, 
its  teat  the  offering-ladle,  its  shower  (of  milk)  the 
shower  of  (ghee) :  from  the  Sacrificer  (it  goes)  to 
the  gods ;  from  the  gods  to  the  cow,  from  the  cow 
to  the  Sacrificer  :  thus  circulates  this  perpetual, 
never-ending  food  of  the  gods.  And,  verily,  for 
whosoever  knows  this,  there  will  thus  be  per- 
petual, never-ending  food.  Now  as  to  the  (mystic) 
correspondence. 

18.  As  to  this  they  say,  '  How  does  this  wealth- 
shower  of  his  obtain  (conformity  with)  the  year,  and 
Agni  ?  how  does  it  correspond  to  the  year,  to 
Agni  ? '  Well,  this  shower  of  wealth  consists  of 
three  hundred  and  sixty  (libations),  and  of  (other) 
six,  and  of  thirty-five.  Now,  the  three  hundred 
and  sixty  which  there  are, —  so  many  being  the  days 
in  the  year, — thereby  it  obtains  the  days  of  the 
year.     And  what  six  there  are, — the  seasons  being 


22  2  ^-ATAPATHA-ERAHMAiVA. 


six  in  number, — thereby  it  obtains  the  nights  of  the 

seasons:  thus  it  obtains  both  the  days  and  nights 

of  the  year.     And  what  thirty-five  there  are,  they 

are  the  (intercalary)  thirteenth  month  \  and  that  is 

the  body,— the  body  (consists)  of  thirty  (limbs),  the 

feet   of  two,  the  breath    of   two    (in-breathing  and 

up-breathing),  and  the   head  is   the  thirty-fifth  :   so 

much  is  the  year ;  and  thus  that  shower  of  wealth 

of  his  obtains  (conformity  with)  the  year,  and  Agni ; 

and  thus  it  corresponds  to  the  year,  to  Agni.     And 

so  many  are  the  bricks  with  special  formulas  which 

are  placed  in  the  centre  of  a  Sa7idi\a.  fire-altar;  for 

these  bricks  indeed  are  the  same  as  these  different 

Agnis  - ;  and  thus  these  Agnis  of  his  come  to  have 

oblations  offered  to  them  separately  by  means  of  the 

shower  of  wealth. 

19.  As  to  this  they  say,  '  How  does  this  shower 
of  wealth  of  his  attain  to  (conformity  with)  the 
Great  Litany,  how  does  it  correspond  to  the  Great 
Litany  ? '  Well,  the  first  nine  formulas  of  this 
shower  of  wealth  are  the  threefold  ^  head ;  and  the 
forty-eight  which  follow  are  the  twenty-four-fold 
wings  ^ ;  and  the  twenty-five  which  follow  are  the 
twenty-five-fold  body^;  and  the  twenty-one  which 
follow  are   the  tail,   as  the   twenty-first*';    and   the 


^  See  p.  167,  note  i. 

2  Viz.  the  different  forms,  or  powers,  of  Agni,  to  which  the  401 
libations  are  offered.  See  IX,  i,  i,  43,  where  the  very  same  calcula- 
tions are  applied  to  the  ^"atarudriya. 

'  See  p.  114,  note  i. 

*  Paksha,  wing,  also  means  half-month,  fortnight,  of  which  there 
are  twenty-four  in  the  year. 

^  See  p.  168,  note  3. 

*  Apparently  in  addition  to  the  fingers  and  toes  (?  of  monkeys). 


IX    KANDA,    3    ADHYAYA,    4    BRAIIMAiVA,    2.         223 

thirty-five  which  follow  are  the  Va."ra  (hymn)  ;  and 
by  the  eighties  (of  verses)  which  follow  those  eighties 
(of  the  mahad  uktham)  are  obtained,  for  by  eighties 
the  Great  Litany  is  counted ;  and  what  there  is 
after  the  eighties,  that  to  him  (corresponds  to) 
what,  in  the  Great  Litany,  there  is  after  the 
eighties  '  ;  and  thus  this  shower  of  wealth  of  his 
attains  to  (conformity  with)  the  Great  Litany,  and 
corresponds  to  the  Great  Litany. 

Fourth  Brahmaa^a. 

1.  He  then  offers  the  Va^aprasaviya^  (set  of 
fourteen  libations), — '  va^a  '  (strength,  sustenance) 
means  food  (anna):  it  thus  is  an  '  anna-prasaviya' for 
him,  and  it  is  food  he  thereby  raises  (pra-su)  for 
him   (Agni). 

2.  For  the  gods,  now  that  they  had  gratified  him 
by  that  food,  and  consecrated  him  by  those  objects 
of  desire,  (to  wit)  by  that  stream  of  wealth  ^  hereby 
gratified  him  once  more  ;  and  in  like  manner  does 
this  (Sacrificer),  now  that  he  has  gratified  him  by 
that  food,  and  consecrated  him  by  those  objects  of 
desire,  that  shower  of  wealth,  hereby  gratify  him 
once  more. 


'  See  pp.  no,  note  3  ;   112,  n.  i  ;   113,  n.  i. 

2  That  is,  oblations  capable  of  promoting  or  quickening  strength 
(or  food, — va^a);  see  part  iii,  p.  37  (where  read  Va^aprasaviya). 
While  the  formulas  of  the  first  seven  of  these  oblations  are  the  same 
as  those  used  for  those  of  the  Va^apeya  (see  V,  2,  2,  5-1 1),  the 
formulas  of  the  last  seven  of  these  oblations  are  Va^.  S.  XVIII, 
30-36  (for  the  first  of  which,  being  the  same  as  IX,  5,  see  VI, 

I,  4,  4)- 

^  This  seems  to  be  in  apposition  to  both  '  that  food/  and  '  those 
objects  of  desire.' 


2  24  .VATAPATHA-BRAHMAA^A. 

3.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  offers  the  Va^^a- 
prasaviya.  This,  to  be  sure,  is  his  (Agni's)  Abhi- 
sheka.  For,  the  gods,  having  gratified  him  by 
that  food,  and  consecrated  him  by  those  objects  of 
desire,  (to  wit)  by  that  shower  of  wealth,  then  by 
this  (offering)  consecrated  him  once  more  ;  and  in 
Hke  manner  does  this  (Sacrificer),  having  gratified 
him  by  that  food,  and  consecrated  him  by  those 
objects  of  desire,  that  shower  of  wealth,  hereby 
consecrate  him  once  more. 

4.  It  consists  of  (seeds  of)  all  (kinds  of)  plants, — 
that  which  consists  of  all  plants  is  all  food  :  he  thus 
gratifies  him  with  all  food,  and  with  all  food  he 
thus  consecrates  him.  Let  him  set  aside  one  of 
these  kinds  of  food,  and  not  eat  thereof  as  long 
as  he  lives.  With  an  udumbara  (ficus  glomerata) 
cup^  and  an  udumbara  dipping-spoon  (he  offers): 
the  significance  of  these  two  has  been  explained. 
They  are  both  four-cornered, — there  are  four  quar- 
ters :  he  thus  gratifies  him  with  food  from  every 
quarter,  and  by  means  of  food  from  every  quarter 
he  thus  consecrates  him. 

5.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  performs  the  Va^a- 
prasaviya  ; — he  thereby  gratifies  those  same  deities 
who  have  been  consecrated  by  this  very  rite  of 
consecration  by  which  he  is  now  about  to  be  con- 
secrated, and,  thus  gratified  by  offering,  they  grant 
him  permission  (to  perform)  this  rite  of  consecration, 
and,  permitted  by  them,  he  becomes  consecrated  ; 
for  only  he  becomes  king  whom  the  (other)  kings 
allow  to  assume  the  royal  dignity,  but  not  he  whom 


^  Or,  pan.     It  has  a  handle,  and  serves  on  this  occasion  in  place 
of  the  offering-ladle  as  well  as  for  anointing  the  Sacrificer. 


IX    KAiVDA,    3    ADIIYAYA,    4    BRAHMAA'A,    8.  225 


they  do  not  (allow  to  do  so).  Thus  when  he  offers 
in  the  fire  he  consecrates  Agni,  and  when  he  offers 
to  these  deities,  he  gratifies  those  gods  who  rule 
over  this  consecration  ceremony. 

6.  And,  indeed,  he  offers  here  also  the  Partha^ 
(oblations)  ; — for  the  gods  now  desired,  '  May  we  be 
consecrated  even  on  this  occasion  by  all  the  rites  of 
consecration  ! '  They  were  indeed  consecrated  on 
this  occasion  by  all  the  rites  of  consecration  ;  and  in 
like  manner  is  the  Sacrificer  on  this  occasion  conse- 
crated by  all  the  rites  of  consecration. 

7.  Now  these  Partha  (oblations)  are  the  Va^a- 
prasaviya  of  the  Ra^asuya ;  and  by  offering  these 
(oblations)  he  is  consecrated  by  the  Ra^asuya ;  and 
the  first  seven  of  the  succeeding  fourteen  (Va^a- 
prasaviya  oblations)  are  the  Va^aprasaviya  ceremony 
of  the  Vac^apeya  ^ :  thus,  by  offering  these  he  is 
consecrated  by  the  Va^apeya.  And  what  other 
seven  there  are,  they  belong  to  Agni  (or,  the  Agni- 
/-ayana) :  by  offering  these,  he  is  consecrated  by  the 
Agni-consecration. 

8.  He  first  offers  those  of  the  Ra;'asuya,  then 
those  of  the  Va^^apeya ;  for  by  performing  the 
Ra^asiiya  one  becomes  king  (ra^a)  and  by  the 
Va^apeya  emperor  (samra^,^),  and  the  position  of 
king    is    (obtained)    first,    and    thereafter    that    of 


'  In  the  same  way  as,  at  the  R%asu\a,  six  Partha  oblations  were 
offered  before,  and  as  many  immediately  after,  the  Consecration 
ceremony,  or  'anointment'  (see  part  iii.  p.  81  seq.),  so  also  on  the 
present  occasion,  except  that,  between  the  first  six  Parthas  and 
the  consecration  ceremony,  the  Va^aprasaviya  set,  referred  to 
in  the  preceding  paragraphs,  is  inserted. 

^  For  these  seven  oblations,  see  V,  2,  2,  6-1 1.  Only  the  second 
set  of  seven  thus  is  peculiar  to  the  AgniX'ayana. 

[43]  Q 


2  26  DATAPATH  A-BRAHMAiVA. 

emperor  ^  :  hence  after  performing  the  Vac^apeya, 
one  could  not  perform  the  Ra^asuya, — it  would  be 
a  descent,  just  as  if  one  who  is  emperor  were  to 
become  king. 

9.  Those  (seven  Vaf^aprasaviya  oblations)  of  the 
fire-altar  he  offers  last,  for  the  Agni-consecration 
indeed  is  (equal  to)  all  those  rites  of  consecration, 
and  he  who  is  consecrated  by  the  Agni-consecration 
rite  becomes  everything,  king  and  emperor :  there- 
fore he  offers  those  of  the  fire-altar  last  of  all. 

10.  He  then  anoints  him  on  a  black  antelope 
skin, — for  the  black  antelope  skin  is  (a  symbol  of) 
the  sacrifice :  it  is  thus  at  the  sacrifice  that  he 
anoints  him.  On  the  hairy  side  (of  the  skin), — for 
the  hairs  are  the  metres  :  on  the  metres  he  thus 
anoints  him.  On  the  left  (north)  side  (of  the  fire- 
altar  he  anoints  him) :  the  significance  of  this  (will 
be  explained)  further  on.  On  (the  skin  laid  clown) 
with  the  neck-part  towards  the  front,  for  that  (tends) 
godwards. 

11.  Some,  however,  anoint  him  on  the  right 
(south)  side  of  the  fire-altar,  on  the  ground  that  it 
is  from  the  right  side  that  food  is  served,  and  that 
they  thus  anoint  him  from  the  food-side.  But  let 
him  not  do  so,  for  that  (southern)  region  belongs  to 
the  Fathers,  and  quickly  he  goes  to  that  region 
whom  they  anoint  in  that  way. 

12.  And  some,  indeed,  anoint  him  on  the  Aha- 
vani)'a,  on  the  ground  that  the  Ahavaniya  is  the 
world  of  heaven,  and  that  they  thus  anoint  him  in 
the  world  of  heaven.  But  let  him  not  do  so,  for 
that  (Ahavaniya,  the  fire-altar,)  is  his  (the  Sacrificer's) 

'  See  V,  I,  I,  12. 


IX    KANDA,    3    ADHYAYA,    4    BRAHMAJVA,     1 6.        22/ 

divine  body,  and  this  (Sacrificer,  or  Sacrificer's  real 
body)  is  his  human  one :  they  thus  attach  that 
divine  body  of  his  to  this  his  mortal  body,  if  they 
anoint  him  in  this  way. 

13.  Let  him  anoint  him  on  the  left  (north)  side 
and  nowhere  else,  for  that  north-eastern  region 
belongs  to  both  gods  and  men  :  they  thus  anoint 
him  whilst  seated  and  established  in  his  own  region, 
for  he  who  is  established  in  his  own  seat  suffers  no 
injury. 

14.  One  who  has  gained  a  position  in  the  world 
should  be  anointed  sitting,  for  one  who  has  gained 
^  position  is  seated,  so  to  speak  ; — and  one  who  is 
striving  to  gain  one  standing,  for  one  who  wishes 
to  gain  a  position,  stands,  so  to  speak.  On  a  he- 
goat's  skin  should  be  anointed  one  desirous  of 
prosperity,  on  a  black-antelope  skin  one  desirous 
of  spiritual  lustre,  on  both  (kinds  of  skins)  one 
desirous  of  both  :  that  (skin)  he  spreads  north  of 
the  tail  (of  the  fire-altar)  with  its  hair  uppermost 
and  its  neck-part  towards  the  east. 

15.  Close  to  the  enclosing-stones'  :  inasmuch  as 
the  black-antelope  skin  is  close  to  the  enclosing- 
stones,  so  that  divine  body  of  his  is  consecrated 
on  the  black-antelope  skin  ;  and  inasmuch  as  he  is 
consecrated  whilst  keeping  hold  of  the  fire-altar 
he  is  not  cut  off  from  that  divine  consecration  (of 
the  Fire). 

16.  He  anoints  him  after  makino-  offerinof  on  the 
fire-altar,    for    that   (altar)    is   his   divine  body,  and 

*  Sayawa  takes  '  aspr/sh/am  parijiita/' '  to  mean  '  lightl}-  touched 
(just  touched)  by  an  enclosing-stone.'  The  participle  would  rather 
seem  here  to  have  an  active  meaning,  like  '  anvarabdha'  in  the  same 
paragraph. 

Q  2 


2  28  ^-ATAPATHA-BRAIIMAA^A. 

this  (Sacrificer  himself)  is  his  human  one  ;  and  the 
gods  indeed  were  first,  and  thereafter  the  men  •. 
therefore,  after  making  offering,  he  anoints  him 
with  what  remains  over  of  that  same  (offering- 
material)  \  He  then  throws  the  dipping-spoon  after 
(the  oblations  into  the  fire). 

17.  Placing  himself  near  the  (Sacrificer's)  right 
arm,  he  then  anoints  him'-,  with  (Vac^.  S.  XVIII, 
37),  'At  the  impulse  of  the  divine  Savitr/, 
I  anoint  thee,  by  the  arms  of  the  Ai^vins,  by 
the  hands  of  Pushan,  by  the  support  of  Saras- 
vati  Vdik,  the  supporter,  by  the  universal 
sovereignty  of  Agni!'- — for  Sarasvati  is  Va/^ 
(speech),  and  hers  is  all  this  support.  Impelled 
by  Savitr/,  he  thus  anoints  him  by  all  this  support 
of  Sarasvati  Va/&,  the  supporter,  and  by  the  uni- 
versal sovereignty  of  Agni.  Here  he  throws  the 
cup  (into  the  fire),  lest  what  is  anointed  (with  offering 
material)  should  remain  outside  the  fire. 

18.  He  anoints  him  in  the  middle  of  the  Partha 
oblations,  for  the  Partha  oblations  are  the  year :  he 
thus  places  him  in  the  middle  of  the  year.  Six 
he  offers  before,  and  six  after  (the  consecration 
ceremony),  for  there  are  six  seasons :  by  the 
seasons  he  thus  encloses  (guards)  him  who  is 
consecrated  on  both  sides.  Br/haspati  is  the  last 
of    the    first    (six^),    and    Indra    the    first    of    the 

^  That  is,  with  the  remainder  of  the  mess  of  different  kinds  of 
seed  mixed  with  milk  and  water. 

^  That  is,  by  sprinkling  him  with  the  Hquid,  or  pouring  it  on 
him. 

*  The  formulas  of  the  twelve  Partha  oblations  are  the  same  as 
those  used  on  the  occasion  of  the  Ra^asuya  (V,  3,  5,  8.  9),  the 
sixth  of  which  is  '  To  Br/haspati  hail ! '  and  the  seventh  '  To  Indra 
hail ! ' 


IX    KAiVDA,    4    ADHYAYA,     I     BRAHMAiVA,    3.         229 


last  (six), — B?'/haspati  is  the  priesthood  (or  priestly 
office),  and  Indra  is  the  nobility  (or  political  power): 
by  the  priesthood  and  the  nobility  he  thus  encloses 
him  who  is  consecrated  on  both  sides. 


Fourth  Adhyaya.     First  BRAHMAivA. 

1.  He  then  offers  the  Rash/rabhr/t  (realm- 
sustainine)  oblations  ; — the  realm-sustainers,  doubt- 
less,  are  the  kings,  for  it  is  they  that  sustain  realms. 
These  deities,  indeed,  have  been  consecrated  by 
this  same  consecration  ceremony  by  which  he  (the 
Sacrificer)  is  now  to  be  consecrated  :  it  is  them  he 
thereby  gratifies,  and  thus  gratified  by  offering,  they 
grant  him  permission  (to  perform)  this  consecration 
ceremony,  and,  permitted  by  them,  he  is  conse- 
crated ;  for  only  he  becomes  king  whom  the  (other) 
kings  allow  (to  assume)  the  royal  dignity,  but  not 
he  whom  they  do  not  (allow  to  assume  it).  And 
inasmuch  as  the  kings  sustain  realms,  and  these 
gods  are  kings,  therefore  Realm-sustaining  (obla- 
tions are  performed). 

2.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  offers  the  Realm- 
sustaining  (oblations).  From  Pra^apati,  when  dis- 
membered, couples  went  forth,  in  the  form  of 
Gandharvas  and  Apsaras ;  and  he,  having  turned 
into  a  chariot,  enclosed  them,  and  having  enclosed 
them,  he  took  them  to  himself  and  made  them  his 
own ;  and  in  like  manner  does  this  (Sacrificer), 
thereby  enclosing  them,  take  them  to  himself  and 
make  them  his  own. 

3.  Now  that  Pra^^apati  who  was  dismembered,  is 
this  very  Agni   who   is   here  being  built   up ;   and 


230  DATAPATH  A-BRAHMAiVA. 

those  couples  which  went  forth  from  him,  are  these 
same  deities  to  whom  he  now  makes  offering. 

4.  He  makes  offering  to  the  Gandharvas  and 
Apsaras,  for  in  the  form  of  Gandharvas  and  Apsaras 
they  went  forth  (from  Pra^^apati).  But  the  Gan- 
dharvas and  Apsaras  also  busy  themselves  with 
sweet  scent  (gandha)  and  beauteous  form  (rupa^), 
whence  if  any  one  goes  to  his  mate  he  cultivates 
sweet  scent  and  a  beautiful  appearance. 

5.  He  offers  pairs  (of  oblations),  for  birth  origi- 
nates from  a  pair ;  and  he  alone  is  (ruler  of) 
a  kingdom  who  propagates  offspring,  but  not  he 
who  does  not  propagate  offspring.  And  inasmuch 
as  couples  sustain  the  realm,  and  these  deities 
consist  of  couples,  these  (oblations  are  called) 
Realm-sustainers.  With  ghee  taken  in  twelve 
ladlings  (he  offers),  and  there  are  twelve  of  these 
oblations :  the  significance  of  this  has  been  ex- 
plained. 

6.  To  the  male  (deity)  he  makes  offering  first, 
then  to  the  females  :  he  thereby  endows  the  male 
pre-eminently  with  power  '\  To  a  single  male  he 
makes  offering,  and  to  many  females,  whence  even 
a  single  man  has  many  wives.  To  the  male  (deity) 
he  makes  offering  both  with  the  Vasha/-call  and  the 
Svaha-call,  to  the  female  (deities)  only  with  the 
Svaha  :  he  thereby  endows  the  male  pre-eminently 
with  power. 

7.  [He  offers,  with,  Va^.  S.  XVIH,  38-43],  '  The 

^  This  is  apparently  intended  as  an  etymological  explanation  of 
the  two  names ;  Apsaras  being  taken  as  derived  from  '  apsas,'  in 
the  sense  of 'beauty.'    Cf.  Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  XIII,  p.  135,  note  3. 

^  Or,  perhaps,  '  he  places  the  male  above  (the  female)  in  respect 
of  power;'  see  p.  133,  note  i. 


IX    KANDA,    4    ADHYAYA,     I    BRAHMAiVA,    9.  23 1 


law-uphol diner,  law-abiding,' — that  is,  the  truth- 
upholding-,  truth-abiding,  —  'Agni  is  the  Gan- 
dharva:  his  Apsaras  are  the  plants,' — for  as 
a  Gandharva,  Agni,  indeed,  went  forth  with  the 
plants  as  the  Asparas,  his  mates, — 'Delights 
(mud)  by  name,' — the  plants  are  indeed  delights, 
for  everything  here  delights  in  plants; — 'may  he 
protect  this  our  priesthood  and  nobility:  to 
him  Hail!  Va/!  To  them  (fem.)  Hail!'  The 
meaning  of  this  has  been  explained  ^ 

8.  'The  Close-knit,'  —  yonder  sun  is  indeed 
close-knit,  for  he  knits  together  the  days  and 
nights; — -'all-wealthy,' — for  that  (sun)  indeed  is 
every  kind  of  wealth  ; — 'Surya  is  the  Gandharva: 
his  Apsaras  are  the  sun-motes;' — for  as  a  Gan- 
dharva, the  sun,  indeed,  went  forth  with  the  sun- 
motes  as  the  Apsaras,  his  mates, — '  Mobile  (ayu) 
by  name,' — for  moving  together^,  as  it  were,  the 
sun-motes  float; — 'may  he  protect  this  our 
priesthood  and  nobility,' — the  meaning  of  this 
has  been  explained. 

9.  'The  most  blessed,' — that  is,  the  most 
worthy  of  worship, — 'sun-rayed,' — for  like  the 
sun's    are     the    moon's   rays;  —  'A'aiulramas    (the 


'  In  accordance  with  the  preceding  paragraph,  that  part  of  the 
formula  wliich  relates  to  the  male  deity,  viz.  '  The  law-upholding, 
law-abiding  Agni  is  the  Gandharva— may  he  protect  this  our  priest- 
hood and  nobility:  to  him  Svaha !  Va/! '  is  to  be  uttered  first,  and 
the  first  oblation  to  be  offered  at  the  call  '  Va/,'  i.e.  Vasha/,  'may 
he  (Agni)  carry  it  (to  the  gods) ! '  Then  that  part  relating  to  the 
female  deities  is  uttered,  after  which  the  second  oblation  is  offered. 
In  the  same  way  die  other  five  formulas  arc  to  be  treated.  See 
Mahidhara's  remarks  on  the  present  formula. 

2  A-yuvana/^,  literall}- '  holding  to  each  other,'  a  wrong  etymology 
of  '  ayu/  '  lively.' 


232  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

moon)  is  the  Gandharva:  his  Apsaras  are  the 
stars  ; ' — for  as  a  Gandharva  the  moon,  indeed,  went 
forth  with  the  stars  as  the  Apsaras,  his  mates  ;— 
'Luminous  (bhekuri)  by  name;' — Hght-giving 
(bhakur/^)  these,  indeed,  are  called,  for  the  stars 
give  light; — 'may  he  protect  this  our  priest- 
hood and  nobility!'  the  meaning  of  this  has  been 
explained. 

10.  'The  Agile,' — that  is,  the  swift, — 'all -ex- 
pansive,'— for  the  wind  (air),  indeed,  makes  up  all 
this  expanse; — 'Vat  a  (the  wind)  is  the  Gandharva: 
his  Apsaras  are  the  waters,' — for  as  a  Gan- 
dharva the  wind,  indeed,  went  forth  with  the  waters 
as  the  Apsaras,  his  mates; — -'Viands  (<Jr^)  by 
name,' — the  waters,  indeed,  are  called  '  urf^a//,'  for 
food  is  produced  from  the  waters; — 'may  he 
protect  this  our  priesthood  and  nobility  ! '  the 
meaning  of  this  has  been  explained. 

11.  'The  beneficent,  well-winged,' — beneficent 
(bhu^yu ')  indeed  is  the  sacrifice,  for  the  sacrifice 
benefits  all  beings, — '  Ya_^;^a  (the  sacrifice)  is  the 
Gandharva:  his  Apsaras  are  the  offering- 
gifts,' — for  as  a  Gandharva  the  sacrifice,  indeed, 
went  forth,   with  the  offering-gifts  as   the  Apsaras, 

'  This  etymological  explanation  of  '  bhekuri '  is  doubtful. 

^  The  real  meaning  of  bhu^yu  in  this  passage  is  very  doubtful ; 
while  it  usually  means  '  flexible,'  the  St.  Petersburg  Dictionary  here 
tentatively  assigns  to  it  the  meaning  '  adder.'  Whether  the  author 
of  the  Brahma/za  really  connects  it  with  '  bhu^  (bhunakti),'  '  to 
enjoy,  benefit'  (instead  of  with  '  bhu^,'  'to  bend  '),  or  whether  the 
explanation  is  merely  meant  as  an  etymological  play  of  words,  is 
not  clear.  IMahidhara  indeed  derives  it  from  the  former  root,  in 
the  sense  of  'to  protect.'  The  order  of  the  words  '  yagno  vai 
bhu^yu^ '  would  properly  require  to  be  rendered  by — Tlie  '  bhu^yu  ' 
doubtless  is  the  sacrifice. 


IX    KAiV£»A,    4    ADIIVAVA,    I    BRAHMAATA,     1 4.        233 

his  mates; — 'Praises  (stava)  by  name,' — the 
offering-gifts  are  indeed  praises,  for  the  sacrifice  is 
praised  for  offering-gifts  ;  and  whosoever  gives  an 
offering-gift  (to  priests)  is  praised; — 'may  he  pro- 
tect this  our  priesthood  and  nobility!'  the 
meaning  of  this  has  been  explained. 

12.  'The  lord  of  creatures,  the  all-worker,' — 
Pra^'-apati  (lord  of  creatures)  is  indeed  the  all-worker, 
for  he  has  wrought  all  this  (universe); — 'Manas 
(the  mind)  is  the  Gandharva:  his  Apsaras  are 
the  hymn-verses  and  hymn-tunes,' — as  a  Gan- 
dharva, the  Mind  indeed  went  forth,  with  the  hymn- 
verses  and  hymn-tunes  as  the  Apsaras,  his  mates  ; — 
'Wishes  (esh/i)  by  name,' — the  hymn-verses  and 
hymn-tunes  are  indeed  wishes,  for  by  verses  and 
tunes  people  pray,  '  May  this  accrue  unto  us !  may 
it  fare  thus  wnth  us  !' — '  may  he  protect  this  our 
priest  and  nobility!'  the  meaning  of  this  has 
been  explained. 

13.  He  then  makes  an  offering  on  the  Head  of 
the  Chariot;— this,  indeed,  is  that  very  rite  of 
consecration, — and  by  that  he  is  now  consecrated, — 
which  this  (Sacrificer)  is  permitted  to  perform  by 
those  deities  with  whose  permission  he  is  con- 
secrated';  for  he  alone  becomes  king  whom  the 
(other)  kings  allow  (to  assume)  the  royal  dignity, 
and  not  he  whom  (they  do)  not  (allow  to  assume  it). 
With  ghee  taken  in  five  ladlings  (he  offers),  and 
this  is  offered  as  five  oblations  :  the  significance  of 
this  has  been  explained. 

14.  On  the  head  (or  front  part  of  the  chariot  the 


1  The  construction  of  the  text  (occurring  again  at  IX,  4,  4,  8)  is 


rather  irregular. 


2  34  ^'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAA^A. 

offering  is  made),  for  it  is  from  the  head  (downwards) 
that  he  who  is  anointed  is  anointed, — whilst  it  is 
held  above  (the  Ahavaniya),  for  above  (others)  is  he 
who  is  thus  anointed ; — with  the  same  formula 
(repeated  each  time),  for  one  and  the  same  (person) 
is  he  who  is  thus  anointed  ; — whilst  taking  round 
(the  chariot-head)  in  every  direction  ^  :  on  every 
side  he  thus  is  anointed. 

15.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  makes  offering  on 
the  head  of  the  chariot ; — it  is  because  this  chariot 
is  yonder  sun  ;  for  it  was  by  assuming  that  form 
that  Pra^apati  enclosed  those  couples,  and  took 
them  to  himself,  and  made  them  his  own  ;  and  in 
like  manner  does  this  (Sacrificer)  thereby  enclose 
them,  and  take  them  to  himself,  and  make  them  his 
own.  Whilst  it  (the  chariot-head)  is  held  above 
(the  fire,  he  offers),  for  above  (others)  was  he  who, 
enclosing  those  couples,  took  them  to  himself,  and 
made  them  his  own  ; — and  with  the  same  formula, 
for  one  and  the  same  is  he  who,  by  enclosing  those 
couples,  took  them  to  himself,  and  made  them  his  own. 

16.  [He  offers  each  time,  with,  Va^.  S.  XVIII, 
44].  '  O  Lord  of  the  world,  Lord  of  creatures  ! ' 
—  for  this  (Agni),  indeed,  is  the  lord  of  the  world, 
and  the  lord  of  creatures; — 'thou  whose  dwellings 
are  on  high,  or  here  below,' — both  on  high  and 

^  The  body  (or  '  nest/  seat-part)  of  the  chariot  is  shifted  sunwise 
round  the  fire  on  tlie  great  altar,  so  that  the  fore-part  keeps  over 
the  fire  where  the  Adhvaryu's  assistant  holds  it,  and  in  each  of  tlie 
four  directions,  as  well  as  in  the  centre  of  the  fire,  the  Adhvaryu 
offers  a  libation  of  ghee,  whilst  facing  the  chariot-head.  According 
to  a  comment  on  the  respective  rules  (Katy.  XVIII,  5,  17-20) 
alluded  to  by  Prof.  Weber  (Ind.  Stud.  XIII,  p.  286),  the  fore-part 
of  the  chariot  would,  however,  seem  to  be  taken  off  the  seat-part ; 
the  latter  being  carried  round  the  fire  as  the  oblations  are  made. 


IX    KANDA,    4    ADIIYAYA,    2    BRAHMAA'A,    5.  235 


here  below,  indeed,  are  his  dwellings; — 'to  this 
priesthood  and  this  nobility  of  ours,' — for  this 
Agni  is  both  the  priesthood  and  the  nobility, — - 
'grant  thou  mighty  protection,  hail ! ' — that  is, 
'  grant  thou  powerful  protection  ! ' 

Second  BRAiiMAiVA. 

1.  He  then  offers  (three)  oblations  of  air  ; — this 
fire-altar  is  these  (three)  worlds,  and  the  oblations  of 
air  are  wind  :  he  thus  places  the  wind  into  these 
worlds,  and  hence  there  is  wind  here  in  these  worlds. 

2.  He  takes  (the  air)  from  outside  the  Vedi  ;  for 
that  wind  which  is  in  these  worlds  is  already  con- 
tained in  this  (fire-altar),  and  he  now  puts  into  it 
that  wind  which  is  beyond  these  worlds. 

3.  From  outside  the  Vedi  (he  takes  it), — for  the 
Vedi  is  this  (earth),  and  the  wind  which  is  on  this 
(earth)  is  already  contained  in  this  (fire-altar):  he  now 
puts  into  it  the  wind  which  is  beyond  this  (earth). 

4.  By  his  two  hollow  hands  (he  takes  it),  for  only 
in  this  way  is  the  catching  of  that  (wind  brought 
about).  With  the  Svaha-call  (he  offers),  for  he 
offers  just  under  the  shafts  (of  the  chariot), — this 
chariot  is  yonder  sun  :  he  thus  places  the  wind  on 
this  side  of  the  sun,  and  hence  that  one  blows  on 
this  side  thereof. 

5.  [He  offers,  with,  Va^.  S.  XVIII,  45],  'Thou 
art  the  cloudy  ocean,' — the  cloudy  ocean,  doubt- 
less, is  yonder  world  (of  the  sky), — 'the  giver  of 
moisture,' — for  that  (wind)  indeed  gives  moisture  : 
he  thus  bestows  on  this  (fire-altar)  the  wind  which  is 
in  yonder  world; — 'blow  thou  kindly  and  pro- 
pitiously upon  me,  hail!' — that  is, 'blow  favour- 
ably and  gentl)-  upon  me  !  ' 


236  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 


6.  'Thou  art  the  stormy  (region),  the  troop 
of  the  Ma  ruts/— the  stormy  (region),  the  troop  of 
the  Maruts,  doubtless,  is  the  air-world:  he  thus 
bestows  on  this  (fire-altar)  the  wind  which  is  in  the 
air-world; — 'blow  thou  kindly  and  propitiously 
upon  me,  hail!' — that  is,  'blow  favourably  and 
gently  upon  me  ! ' 

7.  '  Thou  art  the  one  affording  protection 
and  worship,' — the  one  that  affords  protection  and 
worship,  doubtless,  is  this  (terrestrial)  world  :  he 
thus  bestows  upon  this  (fire-altar)  the  wind  which  is 
in  this  world; — 'blow  thou  kindly  and  propi- 
tiously upon  me,  hail!' — that  is,  'blow  favourably 
and  gently  upon  me  ! ' 

8.  With  three  (formulas)  he  offers, — three  are 
these  worlds,  and  threefold  is  Agni:  as  great  as  Agni 
is,  as  ereat  as  is  his  measure,  with  so  much  he  thus 
puts  air  into  these  worlds. 

9.  And  as  to  why  he  offers  the  oblations  of  air  : 
he  thereby  yokes  that  chariot  of  his  ;  for  it  was 
thereby  that  the  gods  yoked  that  chariot  for  (the 
obtainment  of)  all  their  wishes,  thinking,  '  By  it, 
M^hen  yoked,  we  shall  obtain  them ; '  and  by  that 
yoked  (chariot)  they  indeed  obtained  their  wishes  ; 
and  in  like  manner  does  the  Sacrlficer  thereby  yoke 
that  chariot  of  his  for  (the  obtainment  of)  all  his 
wishes,  thinking,  '  By  it,  when  yoked,  I  shall  obtain 
them ; '  and  by  that  yoked  (chariot)  he  indeed 
obtains  all  his  wishes. 

10.  He  yokes  it  with  the  oblations  of  air^ — the 
oblations  of  air  are  the  vital  airs  :  it  is  thus  with  the 


>  That  is,  these  oblations  are,  as  it  were,  to  represent  the  team 
of  the  chariot. 


TX    KANDA,    4    ADHYAYA,    2    BRAHMAA\\,     12.        237 


vital  airs  he  yokes  it  ^  With  three  (oblations)  he 
yokes  it, — there  are  three  vital  airs,  the  out- 
breathing,  up-breathing,  and  through-breathing  :  it 
is  with  these  he  thus  yokes  it.  Just  below  the 
shaft  (he  offers),  for  just  below  the  shaft  the  horse  is 
yoked  ; — with  his  hands,  for  by  the  hands  the  horse 
is  yoked  ;— in  moving  round  -,  for  in  moving  round 
the  horse  is  yoked. 

1 1.  The  right  yoke-horse  he  puts  to  first,  then  the 
left  yoke-horse,  then  the  right  side-horse  :  for  thus 
it  is  (done)  among  the  gods,  otherwise  in  human 
(practice).  Let  him  not  yoke  that  (chariot  ^)  again, 
lest  he  should  )oke  again  the  yoked  one ;  but  let 
him  give  away  the  vehicle,  thinking,  '  I  shall  reap 
the  benefit  of  the  yoking  of  it  \'  They  carry  it  as 
far  as  the  Adhvaryu's  dwelling,  holding  it  right 
upwards,  for  above  is  that  (Agni).  He  presents  it 
to  the  Adhvaryu,  for  it  is  he  that  performs  therewith. 
Let  him,  however,  (not)  assign  it  to  him  (till)  the 
time  of  the  offering-gifts. 

12.  He  then  offers  the  T.ightsome^'  oblations. 


^  Or,  he  supplies  him  'Agn!). 

2  According  to  Katy.  Sv.  X\'1I1,  6,  i,  2,  the  Adhvaryu  first  takes 
a  double  handful  of  air  from  beyond  the  east  side  of  the  Vedi,  and 
offers  it  below  the  right  (south)  shaft ;  then  from  beyond  the  north 
side  to  be  offered  up  below  the  k-ft  shaft,  and  lastly  from  beyond 
the  south  side  to  be  offered  below  the  shaft  where  the  right  side- 
horse  would  be  yoked.  In  each  case  the  girth  (or  yoke-tie)  is  to  be 
carried  round  in  the  same  way  as  if  a  real  horse  were  yoked. 

^  Saya;/a  takes  it  to  mean  '  that  horse ' ;  and  according  to  Katy. 
Si:  XVIII,  6,  3-5,  the  carriage  is  to  be  carried  to  the  Adhvaryu's 
house,  and,  at  the  lime  when  the  dakshiwas  are  presented  to  the 
priests,  it  is  to  be  given  to  that  priest  along  with  three  horses.  The 
Brahma«a,  however,  does  not  seem  to  mention  the  horses. 

*  Literally,  of  the  yoked  one. 

"  These  oblations  are  here  called  '  ruhmati,'  because  the  three 


238  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 


For  now  the  whole  Agni  was  completed ;  he  now 
wished  for  brilliance  (ru/'),  and  the  gods,  by  means 
of  these  lightsome  (oblations),  endowed  him  with 
brilliance  ;  and  in  like  manner  does  this  (Sacrificer) 
now  endow  him  therewith. 

13.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  offers  the  lightsome 
oblations.  When  Pra^apati  was  dismembered,  his 
brilliance  departed  from  him.  When  the  gods  re- 
stored him,  they,  by  means  of  these  lightsome  obla- 
tions, endowed  him  with  brilliance  ;  and  in  like 
manner  does  this  (Sacrificer)  endow  him  therewith. 

14.  [He  offers,  with,  Vc^.  S.  XVIII,  46-48],  '  O 
Aeni,  what  lights  of  thine  in  the  sun^  .  .  .  ,' 
*0  ye  gods,  what  lights  of  yours  are  in  the 
sun.  .  .^ ' — 'Bestow  thou  light  upon  our  priests, 
(work  thou  light  in  our  kings,  light  in  our 
people  and  6'udras,  bestow  light  upon  me  by 
thy  light) ! '  He  thus  says  '  light '  each  time, — light 
is  immortality  :  it  is  immortality  he  thus  bestows 
upon  him. 

15.  He  then  offers  one  relating  to  Varu;/a. 
That  whole  Agni  has  now  been  completed,  and  he 
now  is  the  deity  Varu//a  :  it  is  to  him  that  he  offers 
this  oblation,  and  by  the  oblation  he  makes  him 
(Agni)  a  deity,  for  that  one  alone  is  a  deity  to  whom 
offering  is  made,  but  not  that  one  to  whom  (offering 
is)  not  (made).  With  a  verse  addressed  to  Varu/za 
(he  offers)  :  he  thus  gratifies  him  by  his  own  self,  by 
his  own  deity. 

16.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  offers  one  relating 

verses  used  wilh  them  contain  the  word  '  ru^-/  being  prayers  for  the 
bestowal  of  Hght. 

^  Tliese  two  verses  had  ah-eady  been  used  in  laying  down  the 
Dviya^us  bricks;  see  VII,  4,  2,  21. 


IX    KANDA,    4    ADHYAYA,    2    BRAIIMAA^V,    20.         239 

to  Varu;^a.  When  Pra^apati  \Yas  dismembered,  his 
strength  departed  from  him.  When  the  gods  re- 
stored him  they,  by  this  (oblation),  bestowed  strength 
upon  him  ;  and  in  Hke  manner  does  this  (Sacrificer) 
bestow  it  upon  him.  With  a  verse  addressed  to 
Varu;/a  (he  offers), — Varu;/a  is  the  ruHng  power,  and 
ruhng  power  means  strength  :  it  is  thus  by  strength 
that  he  bestows  strength  upon  him. 

17.  [He  offers,  with,  Va,^.  S.  XVIII,  49].  'For 
this  I  appeal  to  thee,  worshipping  thee  with 
prayer,' — that  is,  '  F'or  that  I  beseech  thee,  wor- 
shipping thee  with  prayer;' — 'for  this  the  Sacri- 
ficer imploreth  thee  with  offerings,' — that  is, 'for 
this,  this  Sacrificer  implores  thee  with  offerings  ; ' — 
'without  wrath  listen  thou  here,  O  Varu;/a!' 
— that  is,  '  without  anger  listen  thou  here  to  us,  O 
Varu;^a ! ' — 'take  not  our  life  from  us,  O  far- 
ruler!' — he  thereby  gives  utterance  to  a  surrender 
of  his  own  self. 

18.  He  then  offers  the  Arka-yvamedha-santati^ 
oblations.  The  light  (arka),  doubtless,  is  this  fire 
(Agni),  and  the  A^vamedha  (horse-sacrifice)  is  yon- 
der sun, — when  created,  these  two  were  separate: 
by  means  of  these  oblations  the  gods  drew  them 
together  and  connected  them ;  and  in  like  manner 
does  this  (Sacrificer),  by  means  of  these  oblations, 
now  draw  them  together  and  connect  them. 

19.  [He  offers,  with,  Va^^.  S.  XVIII,  50], 
'Heaven-like  heat,  hail!' — the  heat,  doubtless. 
is  yonder  sun  ;  he  thus  establishes  yonder  sun  in 
Agni. 

20.  'Heaven-like  flame,  hail!' — the  flame  is 

^  That  is,  the  joining  together  of  the  fire  and  the  horse-sacrifice. 


240  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

this  Agni  :  he  thus  estabhshes  this  Agni  in  yonder 
sun, 

21.  '  The  Heaven-like  shining  one,  hail!' — 
the  shining  one,  doubtless,  is  yonder  sun  :  he  places 
him  again  up  there. 

22.  'Heaven-like  light,  hail!' — -the  light  is 
this  Agni :  he  places  him  again  here  (on  the  fire- 
altar). 

23.  'The  heaven-like  Surya,  hail!' — Surya, 
doubtless,  is  yonder  sun  :  he  thus  places  yonder  sun 
highest  of  all  this  (universe),  whence  he  is  the 
highest  of  all  this  (universe). 

24.  These  are  five  oblations  he  offers, — the  fire- 
altar  consists  of  five  layers,  a  year  of  five  seasons,  and 
Agni  is  the  year  :  as  great  as  Agni  is,  as  great  as  is 
his  measure,  with  so  much  he  thus  draws  together 
and  connects  those  two. 

25.  And  as  to  why  he  says,  '  Heaven-like  heat, 
hail !  heaven-like  flame,  hail ! ' — these  indeed  are  names 
of  this  fire  :  he  thereby  gratifies  these,  and  by  the 
ofi'ering  he  makes  them  a  deity ;  for  only  that  one  is 
a  deity  to  whom  an  oblation  is  offered,  but  not  that 
to  whom  it  is  not  offered.  Moreover,  by  naming 
them,  he  thus  places  them  on  this  fire-altar. 

26.  These  are  five  oblations  he  offers, — the  fire- 
altar  consists  of  five  layers,  and  the  year  of  five 
seasons,  and  Agni  is  the  year  :  as  great  as  Agni  is, 
as  great  as  is  his  measure,  by  so  much  food  he  thus 
gratifies  him. 

27.  Now  as  to  the  insertion  ^  of  (any  other)  obla- 
tions. If  he  should  know  any  oblation  supplied  with 
a  brahma/^a  (dogmatic  explanation)  let  him  offer  it  at 

^  Or,  location,  proper  place;  cf.  p.  138,  note  i. 


TX    KAA^DA,    4    ADHYAVA,    3    BRAIIMAiVA,     2.  24 1 

this  time  ;  for  it  is  for  (the  obtainment  of  his)  wishes 
that  he  yokes  this  chariot,  and  whatsoever  oblation 
he  offers  on  this  occasion  he  offers  as  one  that  is 
(to  be)  fulfilled. 

28.  As  to  this  they  say,  '  Let  him  not  offer  (any 
additional  oblations),  lest  he  should  do  what  is 
excessive.'  Let  him,  nevertheless,  offer  them  ;  for 
it  is  for  (special)  wishes  that  these  oblations  are 
offered,  and  in  wishes  there  is  nothing  excessive. 

Third  Brahmajva. 
Preparatory  Rites  of  the  Soma-sacrifice. 

1.  Having  now  returned  (to  the  hall),  he,  at  the 
proper  time,  throws  up  the  Dhish;^yas^  (fire- 
hearths) — these  hearths  are  fires  :  he  thus  builds 
up  fire-altars.  They  are  the  clansmen,  and  the 
built-up  fire-altar  is  the  chieftaincy :  he  thus  sets 
up  both  the  chieftaincy  and  the  clan.  The  former 
(altar)  he  builds  up  first,  then  these  (hearths)  :  thus 
he  sets  up  the  clan  after  setting  up  the  chieftaincy. 

2.  That  (fire-altar)  is  a  single  one  :  he  thus  makes 
the  chieftaincy  to  attach  to  a  single  (person),  and 
(social)  distinction  to  attach  to  a  single  (person). 
The  others  are  numerous  :  he  thus  bestows  multi- 
plicity on  the  clan. 

'  A  Soma-sacrifice  being  about  to  be  performed  on  the  newly 
erected  fire-allar,  now  properly  consecrated,  all  the  necessary 
preparatory  business  and  ceremonial  enjoined  for  such  a  sacri- 
fice have  now  to  be  gone  through  in  the  way  detailed  in  part  ii 
of  this  translation.  The  author  here  only  alludes  to  those  points 
in  the  Soma-iitual  in  regard  to  which  the  present  performance 
offers  any  special  feature  either  additional  to,  or  modificatory  of, 
the  ordinary  ceremonial.  The  construction  of  the  Dhishwyas,  or 
fire-hearths  of  the  different  priests  (for  which  see  part  ii,  p.  148, 
note  4),  is  one  of  these  points. 

[43]  R 


242  ^ATAPATHA-BRAIIMAiVA. 

3.  That  (fire-altar)  consists  of  five  layers,  the 
others  of  a  single  layer  :  he  thus  endows  the  chieftain 
(or,  ruler)  pre-eminently  with  power,  and  makes  the 
chieftain  more  powerful  than  the  clan  (or  people). 
Upwards  he  builds  that  one  :  he  thus  builds  the 
ruling  power  upward  by  (social)  layers  ;  sideways 
the  others  :  he  thus  makes  the  clan  obedient  to  the 
chieftain  from  below, 

4.  That  one  he  builds  up  both  with  the  Ya^ush- 
mati  (bricks  laid  down  with  a  special  formula),  and 
with  the  Lokampr///a  (or  space-filling  ones,  laid 
down  with  a  common  formula)  ;  the  others  with  the 
space-filling  one  alone  :  he  thus  endows  the  chiettain 
pre-eminently  with  power,  and  makes  the  chieftain 
more  powerful  than  the  clan,  and  the  clan  less 
powerful  than  the  chieftain. 

5.  And  when  he  builds  up  these  (hearths)  only 
with  the  space-filling  one,  the  Lokampr/;/a  being  the 
nobility^ — he  thereby  places  the  chieftain,  as  the 
eater,  among  the  clan.  He  builds  up  (dhish;^ya- 
hearths)  both  of  the  Soma-sacrifice  ^,  and  of  the  fire- 
altar  ;  first  those  of  the  Soma-sacrifice,  and  then 
those  of  the  fire-altar :  the  significance  of  this  has 
been  explained.  Whatever  Soma-hearth  he  (merely) 
throws    up    (at  the  Soma-sacrifice),    that    he    (now) 

A 

builds  up.     The  Agnidhriya  he  builds  first,  for  that 


■■  See  p.  132,  note  2. 

^  There  are  eight  dhish«ya-hearths  at  the  Soma-sacrifice,  two 
of  which,  the  Agnidhriya  and  INIar^aliya.  were  raised  north  and  south 
of  the  cart-shed  (havirdhana),  whilst  the  others  (viz.  those  of  the 
liotri,  &c.)  were  raised  inside  the  Sadas  along  its  eastern  side. 
Tliey  were  merely  mounds  of  earth  covered  with  sand,  whilst  the 
additional  hearths  (of  the  fire-altar)  now  to  be  erected  are  partly 
built  of  bricks. 


IX    KANDA,    4    ADHYAYA,    3    BRAHMAA\\,    8.         243 

one  he  throws  up  first  (at  the  Soma-sacrifice) ;  (he 
does  so)  whilst  sitting  to  the  right  (south)  of  it  : 
the  significance  of  this  has  been  explained  ^ 

6.  On  this  (Agnidhri)a)  he  putS'  eight  bricks, — 
the  Gayatri  consists  of  eight  syllables,  and  Agni  is 
of  Gayatra  nature  :  as  great  as  Agni  is,  as  great  as 
is  his  measure,  so  great  he  thus  builds  him  up. 
The  variegated  stone  -  is  the  ninth  of  them  :  there 
are  nine  vital  airs — seven  in  the  head  and  two 
downward  ones — it  is  these  he  thus  puts  into  it.  The 
fire  which  is  placed  on  the  erected  (hearth)  is  the 
tenth  ; — there  are  ten  vital  airs  ■^,  and  the  Agnidhra 
is  the  middle  (between  the  Garhapatya  and  Ahava- 
niya  fires)  :  he  thus  puts  the  vital  airs  in  the  middle 
of  it ;  for  the  vital  airs,  being  in  the  middle  of  the 
body,  move  along  it  in  this  direction,  and  in  that 
direction. 

7.  Twenty-one  he  places  on  the  Hotriya  (hearth), 
and  there  are  twenty-one  enclosing-stones  •* :  the 
significance  of  this  has  been  explained. 

8.  Six  (he  places)  on  the  Marcr^li3a, — these  are 
the  six  seasons,  the  Fathers ;    for  the  seasons,  the 


^  See  VII,  I,  I,  21  seq.,  where  the  way  in  which  the  bricks  of 
the  Garhapatya  hearth  are  laid  down  is  described  in  detail. 

^  When  Agni  was  led  forwards  from  the  Garhapatya  to  be  installed 
on  his  newly  built  altar,  as  the  Ahavaniya  or  offering  fire,  a  varie- 
gated stone,  meant  to  represent  the  sun,  was  deposited  near  the 
place  (on  the  northern  edge  of  the  Vedi)  where  the  Agnidhra  shed 
and  hearth  would  afterwards  have  to  be  erected;  see  IX,  2,  3, 
14-19. 

^  That  is,  including  the  central  one,  the  outlet  of  which  is  the 
navel;  cf.  VIII,  i,  3,  10. 

■•  The  numbers  of  bricks  and  enclosing-stones  are  the  same  as 
for  the  Garhapatya  hearth,  for  which  (with  their  symbolic  meaning) 
see  VII,  I,  I,  32-35. 

K  2 


244  ^'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAA^A. 

Fathers  \  indeed,  heaped  up  (a  rampart)  round  that 
(fire)  from  the  south.  This  one  hes  to  the  south  of 
those  (other  hearths)  ^ — this  (Agnidhriya)  he  lays 
down  in  this  way  (direction),  and  these  (other  hearths) 
in  this  way,  and  that  one  (the  Fire-ahar)  in  this  way: 
he  thereby  makes  the  peasantry  look  towards  the 
chieftain. 

9.  He  then  encloses  these  (hearths)  by  enclosing- 
stones  ; — the  enclosing-stones  are  the  waters  :  it  is 
thus  by  water  that  he  surrounds  them  ".  He  merely 
lays  them  down  all  round,  for  those  of  the  waters 
which  flow  in  a  hollow  (channel)  are  the  chieftain, 
and  these  stray  waters  are  the  clansmen  ;  thus,  when 
he  encloses  that  (great  fire-altar)  by  a  dug-in  (row  of 
stones),  he  thereby  adds  power  to  power,  and  sur- 
rounds (protects)  power  by  power  ;  and  when  he 
merely  lays  down  those  (enclosing-stones  of  the 
hearths)  all  round,  he  thereby  adds  clansman  (or  clan) 
to  clansman,  and  surrounds  (protects)  clansman  by 
clansman  ^.     As  many  bricks  with  special  formulas  as 

^  Saya;/a  refers  to  a  passage  in  the  Taittiriyaka,  according  to 
which  a  dying  man  is  changed  to  whatever  season  he  dies  in, 
whence  the  six  seasons  are  the  representatives  of  all  the  deceased 
ancestors.  Since  the  Fathers  reside  in  the  southern  region  it  is 
from  that  quarter  that,  by  laying  down  the  bricks,  they  are  supposed 
to  raise  a  rampart  for  the  Mar^aliya  fire. 

^  Viz.  on  the  southern  edge  of  the  Vedi,  exactly  south  of  the 
Agnidhriya,  whilst  the  other  dhishwyas  run  in  a  line  from  north  to 
south  to  the  left  of  the  space  between  the  Agnidhriya  and  Mar^g^aliya. 
The  other  hearths,  together  with  the  great  fire-altar  occupying  the 
eastern  part  of  the  Vedi,  would  thus,  as  it  were,  face  the  Mar^aliya 
in  a  semicircle.      See  the  plan  of  the  Sacrificial  ground,  part  ii, 

P-  475- 

*  That  is,  as  the  earth  is  surrounded  by  the  ocean  (VII,  i,  i,  13), 

or  a  stronghold  by  a  moat. 

^  Viz.  inasmuch  as  the  fire-altar  and  the  Ahavaniya  fire  on  it,  as 


IX    KANDA,  4  ADHYAYA,   3   BRAHMAiVA,     II.         245 

there  are  (in  each  hearth)  so  many  enclosing-stones 
there  are  (in  each)  ;  for  with  that  (fire-altar)  there 
are  as  many  enclosing-stones  as  there  are  such 
bricks  in  it  ^ :  he  thus  makes  the  clan  obedient 
and  subservient  to  the  chief. 

10.  He  then  scatters  a  layer  of  earth  on  (each  of) 
these  (hearths) :  the  significance  of  this  has  been 
explained  ^  Silently  •'  (he  scatters  it),  for  indistinct 
is  the  clan  (or  people).  Then,  after  the  cake-offer- 
ing of  the  Agnishomiya  (animal  sacrifice )  *,  he 
prepares  the  propitiatory  oblations  to  the 
Regions; — that  fire-altar  is  the  regions:  it  is  to 
them  he  offers  these  oblations,  and  thus  by  offering 
makes  them  a  deity,  for  only  that  one  is  a  deity  to 
whom  an  oblation  is  offered,  but  not  that  to  whom 
it  is  not  offered.  There  are  five  (such  oblations), 
for  there  are  five  regions. 

11.  As   to  this  they  say, —  Let  him  prepare  this 

well  as  ihe  dug-in  circle  of  enclosing-stones,  are  identified  with  the 
ruling  power ;  whilst  the  dhishwyas  as  well  as  the  circles  of  stones 
lying  loosely  around  thenr  represent  the  clan. 

'  This  is  not  clear  to  me :  whilst  there  are  395  such  bricks  with 
special  formulas  in  the  five  layers  of  the  great  altar,  it  is  enclosed 
by  only  261  pari^rits;  see  p.  158,  note  i.  Besides  there  are  no 
'  ya^ushmali '  bricks  in  these  hearths,  but  only  '  lokamp;-/;/as  " ; 
one  would  therefore  expect  '  ish/akas '  (bricks)  for  'ya^-ushmatyas' 
the  first  time  (cf.  comm.  on  Katy.  ^'r.  XVHI,  7,  13).  The  Holr/'s 
hearth  contains  twenty-one  bricks,  the  Brahma«ai^Ma?«sin's  eleven, 
the  Mar^aliya  six,  and  the  others  eight  bricks ;  and  in  each  case 
the  common  formula,  '  Lokam  pr/wa,  &c.'  (see  VIII,  7,  2,  6),  is 
])ronounced  once  after  every  ten  bricks,  and  after  any  odd  bricks 
remaining  over  at  the  end.     Cf.  Katy.  St.  XVIII,  6,  8  seq. 

'  See  VIII,  7,  3,  I  seq. 

^  He  does  not  use  any  such  formula  as  that  used  in  covering 
each  layer  of  the  great  altar  with  earth  ;  see  VIII,  7,  3,  7. 

*  See  part  ii,  p.  199,  note  2  (where  the  reference  at  the  end  sliould 
be  to  IV,  2,  5,  22). 


246  fi-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAA-A. 

offering  (ish/'i)  so  as  to  consist  of  material  for  ten 
oblations  ; — this  (offering)  is  (performed)  with  all  the 
stomas  and  all  the  pr/sh^/^a  (samans)^;  and  there  are 
(used  in  it)  all  the  metres,  all  the  regions,  all  the 
seasons — and  this  Agni  (the  fire-altar)  is  all  this  : 
he  thus,  by  the  (amount  of)  offering  material  (taken 
out  for  the  ish/i),  makes  (Agni)  the  deity  ^ ;  for  only 
that  one  is  the  deity  for  whom  the  oblation  is 
prepared,  not  one  for  whom  it  is  not  prepared. 
There  are  (in  that  case)  ten  (oblations), — the  Vira^ 
(metre)  consists  of  ten  syllables,  and  Agni  is  vira^ 
(far-shining,  or  far-ruling)  ;  there  are  ten  regions, 
and  Agni  (the  fire-altar)  is  the  regions ;  ten  vital 
airs,  and  Agni  Is  the  vital  airs  :  as  great  as  Agni  Is, 
as  crreat  as  Is  his  measure,  with  so  much  food  he 
thus  gratifies  him. 

12.  But,  indeed,  he  may  also  take  out  these 
oblations  for  the  Divine  Quickeners  ^ ;  for  these  are 
the  deities  which  become  consecrated  by  this  conse- 
cration ceremony  by  which  he  Is  now  to  be  conse- 
crated :  it  Is  them  he  thus  gratifies,  and  gratified  by 
offering  they  permit  him  (to  perform)  this  consecra- 
tion   ceremony,    and   with    their    permission    he   is 


^   See  part  iii,  introduction,  p.  xx  seq. 

"^  As  Sayawa  points  out,  the  Taittiriyas  make  Agni  the  deity  of 
this  ish/i,  the  invitatory  formulas  (puro^vnuvakya)  of  the  different 
havis  (oblations)  naming  him  each  time  with  different  epithets 
relating  to  different  metres,  stomas,  pr;sh//zas,  and  seasons.  Cf. 
Taitt.  S.  I,  8,  4:   Taitt.  Br.  I,  8,  19. 

*  For  these  eight  deities  (Savitrz'  Satyaprasava,  Agni  Gr?'hapati, 
&c.),  to  whom  offering  is  made  at  the  Abhishe-^aniya  or  Consecra- 
tion ceremony  of  the  Ra^asuya,  between  the  chief  oblation  of  the 
animal  cake-ofTering  (Pa^upurois'aja)  and  its  Svish/akr/t,  whilst  the 
whole  of  the  Pajupurofl^a^-a  is  again  performed  in  the  middle  of 
the  animal  sacrifice,  see  part  iii,  p.  69  seq. 


TX    KAiVDA,   4   ADIIYAYA,    3   BRAHMAiVA,    I  5.  247 

consecrated ;  for  only  he  becomes  king  whom  the 
(other)  kings  allow  (to  assume)  the  royal  dignity,  but 
not  he  whom  they  do  not  (allow  to  assume  it).  And 
inasmuch  as  these  deities  are  consecrated  (quick- 
ened) by  this  consecration  ceremony  and  quicken 
him  for  this  consecration,  they  are  (called)  the 
Divine  Ouickeners. 

13.  These  (deities)  come  to  have  two  names,  as 
he  who  is  consecrated  by  the  rite  of  consecration 
comes  to  have  two  names ;  for  the  very  rite  of 
consecration  for  which  he  is  quickened,  and  by  which 
he  is  consecrated  (quickened),  is  his  second  name  \ 

14.  There  are  eight  (such  deities), — the  Gajatri 
consists  of  eight  syllables,  and  Agni  is  of  Gayatra 
nature :  as  great  as  Agni  is,  as  great  as  is  his 
measure,  by  so  much  food  he  thus  gratifies  him. 

15.  As  to  this  they  say, — He  ought  not  to  offer 
(any  of)  these  oblations,  lest  he  should  do  what  is  ex- 
cessive. Let  him  nevertheless  offer  them  ;  for  these 
oblations  are  offered  for  (the  obtainment  of  special) 
wishes,  and  in  wishes  there  is  nothing  excessive. 
And  whatsoever  oblation  he  offers  after  the  Pa^u- 
purortia^a  (the  cake-offering  connected  with  the  animal 
sacrifice),  that  is  placed  inside  the  animal  victim 
itself  as  its  sacrificial  sap-.  He  offers  both  kinds 
(of  oblations),  those  of  the  Soma-sacrifice  and  those 
of  the   fire-altar  (or  AgnU-ayana),  first  those  of  the 

'  That  is  to  say,  for  example,  he  who  has  performed  the  Va^a- 
peya  is  called  Va^apeya-ya^in,  Say. 

^  These  oblations,  as  well  as  those  of  the  Pai-upuror/a-u,  inserted 
as  they  are  in  the  middle  of  the  animal  offering, — jusl  after  the 
offering  of  the  omentum  of  the  victim, — are  supposed  to  supply  to 
the  victim  its  sacrificial  sap  or  essence  which  was  taken  out  of  it  in 
the  shape  of  the  omentum.     See  III,  8,  3,  2. 


248  S-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

Soma-sacrifice,  and  afterwards  those  of  the  fire-altar  : 
the  purport  of  this  has  been  explained.  In  a  loud 
voice  ^  the  Pa^upurort'ai'a  offering  (is  performed),  in 
a  low  voice  these  (additional  oblations),  for  they  are 
an  ish/i-.  With  the  Pai-upurO(^ai"a  he  (the  Adhvaryu) 
says,  '  Recite  ! — Urge  ! '  and  with  these  (oblations), 
'  Recite  ! — Worship" '  for  they  are  an  ish/i.  There 
is  the  same  Svish/akrz't  and  the  same  i<:/a*  (for  these 
oblations).  The  (Devasu)  deities  have  received 
offering,  and  the  Svish/akrzt  (of  the  Paiupuro^ajra) 
has  not  yet  been  attended  to  •^ — 

^  That  is,  in  the  formulas  the  name  of  the  deity  to  whom  the 
oblation  is  offered  is  pronounced  in  a  loud  voice. 

^  That  is,  a  '  kamyesh/i,'  or  offering  for  the  obtainment  of  some 
special  object,  which  has  to  be  performed  in  a  low  voice;  see  I,  3. 

^  Or,  '  Pronounce  the  offering-prayer  ! '  For  these  two  latter 
calls  (anubiuhi ! — ya^a !),  by  which  the  Adhvaryu  calls  on  the 
Hotr/  to  pronounce  the  invitatory  prayer  (anuvakya  or  puro^^nu- 
vakya)  and  the  offering-prayer  (ya^ya)  respectively,  at  ish/is,  see 
I,  5,  2,  8-10  and  I,  5,  3,  8  ;  and  for  the  first  two  (anubruhi ! — 
preshya!),  by  the  former  of  which  the  Adhvaryu  calls  on  the  Hotr/ 
to  recite  the  invitatory  prayer;  whilst  by  the  latter  he  calls  on  the 
Maitravaru»a  to  '  urge '  (or  '  prompt ')  the  Hotr/  to  pronounce  the 
offering-prayer  at  the  animal  sacrifice,  see  HI,  8,  i,  4  with  note 
(where  attention  might  have  been  called  to  the  difference  that  exists 
between  the  ish/i  and  the  animal  sacrifice  in  regard  to  the  formula 
by  which  the  Adhvaryu  calls  for  the  recitation  of  the  offering-prayer). 
In  regard  to  this  point  there  is,  however,  a  difference  of  opinion 
between  the  Madhyandina  and  the  Kaz/va  schools,  the  latter  using 
for  the  Pajupuror/aja  on  this  occasion,  as  well  as  on  that  of  the 
Ra^asuya,  the  same  calls  as  those  of  the  inserted  ish/is ;  cf  Katy. 
^•r.  XV,  4,  18-20. 

*  For  the  Svish/akr/t,  or  oblation  to  Agni,  '  the  maker  of  good 
offering,'  offered  after  the  chief  oblations,  see  I,  7,  3,  i  seq. ;  for  the 
if/a-oblation  (and  invocation  of  lo'a),  I,  8,  i,  i  seq. 

^  The  tentative  meaning  assigned  to  '  asamavahitam,'  '  not  in 
immediate  connection  with  (the  Svish/akm),'  can  scarcely  be  right. 
The  clause  seems  simply  to  mean  that  the  (purvabhisheka")  touching 


TX    KANPA,   4   ADHYAYA,    4  BRAHMAiVA,    I.  249 

16.  He  then  touches  it  (the  fire-altar)  with  (the 
formula  of)  the  prehminary  consecration  (Va^.  S.  IX, 
39.  40),  'May  Savitr/  quicken  thee  for  (powers 
of)  quickening'  !  .  .  .  This  (man),  O  ye  (people), 
is  your  king;  Soma  is  the  king  of  us  Brah- 
ma was  ! ' — he  thereby  excludes  the  Brahma;ms  (from 
the  power  of  the  king)  and  makes  them  such  as  are 
not  to  be  fed  upon  (by  the  king^ 

Fourth  Braiimaa^a. 

A(;niyogana,  or  Yoking  of  the  Fire-altar  ;    and 
soma-sacrifice. 

I.  Then,  early  next  morning^,  when  about  to 
bespeak  the  morning  prayer  ^,  he  yokes  the  Fire- 
altar,  thinking,  'With  it,  when  yoked,  I  shall  obtain  ;' 
and  by  it,  when  yoked,  he  obtains  all  wishes.      He 

of  the  altar  is  to  take  place,  as  in  the  case  of  the  (preliminary)  con- 
secration at  the  Ra^asiaya,  immediately  after  the  obl,\tions  to  the 
Divine  Quickeners,  and  before  the  Svish/akrz't  oblation  of  the  PaJii- 
purodasa.  has  been  performed.  See  V,  3,  3,  10,  where  a  somewhat 
similar  expression  is  used.  One  might  liave  some  doubt  as  to 
whether,  both  here  and  at  the  Ra^.'-asCna,  there  is  any  Svish/akr/t 
at  all  to  these  Devasfi-havi7;/-hi,  or  whether  the  statement,  '  There 
is  the  same  svish/akr/t  and  the  same  i</a,'  applies  not  to  them 
merely,  but  to  them  and  the  Pajupuro^/aja.  If  this  latter  alternative 
were  the  correct  one,  we  should,  however,  exj^ect  that  something 
had  been  said  on  this  point  in  connection  with  the  Devasu  oblations 
of  the  Ra^^asuya ;  and  moreover  the  nature  of  the  two  oblations 
seems  too  different  for  such  a  partial  identification,  requiring  as 
they  do  ditferent  '  praishas,'  or  calls,  in  the  Svish/akr/t  (viz.  '  ya^a  ' 
the  one,  and  '  preshya'  the  other) ;  see  also  IX,  5,  i,  40,  and  note 
3,  p.  248;  also  Katy,  Sr.  V,  11,  23-24. 

^  For  the  complete  formulas,  see  V,  3,  3,  11,  12. 

"^  That  is,  on  the  first  Sutya,  or  pressing-day. 

-''  That  is,  by  calling  on  the  Hotr/  to  'Recite  to  the  gods,  the 
early  coming  ! '  see  111,  9,  3,  10,  with  note  thereto  giving  particulars 
regarding  the  Praiaranuvaka. 


250  ^-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

yokes  it  prior  to  the  whole  performance,  so  that 
all  that  is  done  thereafter  is  laden  on  that  yoked 
(altar-cart). 

2.  He  yokes  it  on  the  enclosing-sticks,  for  those 
enclosing-sticks  are  fires '  :  it  is  with  fires  he  thus 
yokes  the  fire-altar. 

3.  Having  touched  the  middle  enclosing-stick  '^, 
he  mutters  this  formula  (Va^.  S.  XVHI,  51),  'The 
Fire  I  yoke  with  might,  with  ghee!' — might 
means  strength  :  thus,  'The  fire  I  yoke  (furnish)  with 
strength,  with  ghee;' — 'the  heavenly  bird,  great 
in  vigour,' — for  that  (fire-altar)  is  indeed  a  heavenly 
bird,  and  great  in  vigour,  in  smoke"; — 'Thereby 
we  will  go  to  the  region  of  the  bay,  rising  unto 
the  light,  beyond  the  highest  firmament!' — 
The  firmament,  doubtless,  is  the  heavenly  world  : 
thus,  '  Thereby  we  will  go  to  the  region,  of  the  bay 
(horse,  the  sun)  mounting  up  to  the  heavenly  world, 
beyond  the  highest  firmament.' 

4.  Then  on  the  southern  (right)  one,  with  (V^a^.  S. 
XVHI,  52), 'By  these  never-decaying,  feathered 
wings  of  thine  wherewith  thou  repellest  the 
demons,  O  Agni,  may  we  fly  to  the  world  of 
the  righteous  whither  the  erst-born  seers  went 
of  old  ! '  he  thereby  alludes  to  those  7?/shis  *. 

^  See  the  ritual  legend,  I,  3,  3,  13  seq. 

^  That  is,  the  one  along  the  hind  (or  west)  side  of  the  Ahavaniya 
fire  on  the  great  altar,  being  the  base  of  the  triangle  formed  by  the 
three  enclosing-sticks.  The  order  in  which  they  are  touched  is 
the  same  as  that  in  which  they  were  laid  down. 

^  Mahidhara  actually  takes  *  smoke  (dhuma) '  here  to  be  intended 
as  the  literal  meaning  of  '  vayas.' 

*  Viz.  the  seven  ^zshis,  identified  with  the  seven  vital  airs  which 
came  to  constitute  the  first  Purusha  (Agni-Pra^apati),  and  hence 
the  bird-shaped  fire-altar.     See  \T,  1,1,1  seq. 


TX    KAiVDA,    4    ADHYAYA,    4    BRAIIMAiVA,    8.        25 1 

5.  Then  on  the  northern  (left)  one,  with  (Va^. 
S.  XVTII,  53),  'The  potent  drop,  the  faithful 
eagle,  the  golden-winged  bird,  the  active 
{bhura;^yu),' — golden  means  immortal  :  thus,  '  the 
immortal-winged  bird,  the  bearer  (bhartr/)  ; ' — 
'  the  mighty  is  seated  in  the  firm  seat:  homage 
be  to  thee,  injure  me  not!' — he  thereby  gives 
utterance  to  a  surrender  of  his  own  self. 

6.  Now  that  middle  formula  is  the  body,  and  the 
two  on  both  sides  thereof  are  the  wings  (of  the  bird- 
shaped  altar)  :  hence  these  two  allude  to  '  wings  \' 
for  these  two  are  the  wings. 

7.  With  three  (formulas)  he  yokes  it, — threefold 
is  Agni  :  as  great  as  Agni  is,  as  great  as  is  his 
measure,  with  so  much  he  thus  yokes  him. 

8.  And  when  he  has  pressed  the  king  (Soma)  he 
offers  in  the  fire  -.  This,  indeed,  is  that  very  rite  of 
consecration  (or  pressing) — and  by  that  he  is  now 
consecrated  (or  pressed) — which  this  (Sacrificer)  is 
permitted  to  perform  by  those  deities  with  whose 
permission  he  is  consecrated  ^ ;  for  he  alone  becomes 
king  whom  the  (other)  kings  allow  (to  assume)  the 
royal  dignity,  and  not  he  whom  (they  do)  not  (allow 
to  assume  it).  Now  when  he  offers  in  the  fire 
he  thereby  consecrates  (anoints)  Agni,  and  that 
divine  body  of  his,  being  consecrated  by  Soma, 
becomes  consecrated  by  the  nectar  of  immortality. 
And  he  himself  drinks  (thereof)  :  he  thereby  conse- 

'  In  the  first  formula  the  word  for  'bird  (eagle)'  is  '  suparwa,' 
literally  '  the  well-winged  (well-feathered)  one.' 

-  This  refers  to  the  libations  made  from  the  several  cups  (grahas), 
the  contents  of  which  are  afterwards  consumed  by  the  priests  (and 
Sacrificer) ;  cf.  part  ii,  p.  316,  note  i. 

^  For  the  same  irregular  construction,  see  IX,  4,  i,  13. 


252  5-ATAPATHA-ERAhMA;VA. 


crates  himself,  and  this  self  (body)  of  his,  being 
consecrated  by  Soma,  becomes  consecrated  by  the 
nectar  of  immortality. 

9.  Having  offered  in  the  fire  (or,  on  the  fire-altar), 
he  drinks  (Soma),  for  that  (fire-altar)  is  his  (the 
Sacrificer's)  divine  body',  and  this  (Sacrificer's  real 
body)  is  his  human  one  ;  and  the  gods  indeed  were 
first,  and  afterwards  men  :  therefore,  having  offered 
(Soma)  in  the  fire,  he  drinks  (thereof). 

10.  Having  now  obtained  the  wish  for  (the 
accomplishment  of)  which  he  yokes  it  (the  altar),  he 
unyokes  it  when  about  to  bespeak  the  Ya^;7a- 
yac^;/iya  stotra  ^, — for  the  Yaf^;2a}a^/'2iya  is  the 
heavenly  world,  and  it  is  for  the  attainment  ot  that 
(world)  that  he  yokes  it :  thus  (he  unyokes  it)  after 
obtaining  the  wish  for  which  he  yoked  it, 

11.  It  is  prior  to  the  Stotra  that  he  unyokes  it  :— 
were  he  to  unyoke  after  the  Stotra.  he  would  pass 
beyond  that  world  ^  and  lose  it ;  but  when  he  un- 
yokes prior  to  the  Stotra,  he  unyokes  forthwith 
after  reaching  the  world  of  heaven. 

12.  He  unyokes  it  on  the  enclosing-sticks,  for  it 


'   See  IX,  3,  4,  12. 

^  The  Yagna.ya.gfHy 3.  (or  Ya^77aya^;7iya)  stotra  is  the  last  and 
characteristic  chant  of  the  Agnish/oma  mode  of  Soma-sacrifice, 
whence  it  is  more  properly  called  Agnish/oma-saman ;  the  Yagna- 
ya^;7iya,  properly  speaking,  being  the  verses,  Sama-v.  II,  53,  54, 
chanted  to  a  particular  tune,  and  generally  (though  not  always) 
used  for  the  closing  chant  of  the  Agnish/oma. 

^  That  is,  because  the  Yag/iayagfilya  marks,  as  it  were,  the  end 
of  the  (Agnish/oma)  Soma-sacrifice,  and  anything  performed  there- 
after is,  so  to  speak,  outside  the  sacrifice,  or  beyond  it.  Katy.  Sr. 
XVIII,  6,  17  calls  it  Agnimaruta  stotra,  i.e.  the  chant  belonging 
to  the  Agnimaruta-J-astra  (which  has  to  be  recited  by  the  Hotr/ 
after  that  chant);  cf.  part  ii,  p.  369  note. 


IX    KANDA,    4    ADHYAYA,    4    BRAHMAiVA,     I4.        253 

is  on  the  enclosing-sticks  that  he  yokes  it,  and  at 
whatever  place  (of  the  bod))  people  yoke  a  horse 
there  they  also  unyoke  it. 

1 3.  Having  touched  it  (the  fire)  at  the  two  joints  \ 
he  mutters  these  two  formulas, — thus  two  formulas 
equal  in  power  three  enclosing-sticks, — with.  {VAo:  S. 
XVIII,  54),  'The  sky's  head  thou  art,  the 
earth's  navel,  [the  essence  of  the  waters  and 
plants,  the  life  of  all.  the  ample  refuge  (?) : 
homage  be  to  the  path  !]'  on  the  right,  and  with 
(55),  'On  the  head  of  the  Ail  dost  thou  keep 
standing,  [in  the  (aerial)  ocean  is  thy  heart,  in 
the  waters  thy  life  :  bestow  water,  send  the 
water-store  (cloud), — from  the  sky,  from  the 
cloud,  from  the  air,  from  the  earth,  favour 
us  with  rain!]'  on  the  left  (joint), — thus  with  two 
(verses)  containing  (the  word)  *  head,'  for  this  is 
indeed  its  head  ;  and  containing  (the  words)  '  in 
the  waters  - "  :  that  Ya^?7aya^7/iya  doubtless  is  Agni 
Vai^vanara's  chant  of  praise,  and  water  is  (a  means 
of)  appeasing, — therefore  (he  touches  them)  with 
two  (verses)  containing  (the  words) — '  the  waters.' 

14.  With  two  (verses)  he  unyokes  it, — two-footed 
is  the  Sacrificer,  and  Agni  is  the  Sacrificer :  as  great 
as  Agni  is,  as  great  as  is  his  measure,  with  so  much 
he  thus  unyokes  him.  With  three  (verses)  he 
yokes, — that  (makes)  five, — the  fire-altar  consists  of 
five  layers,  the  year  (of)  five  seasons,  and  Agni  is 


*  That  is,  al  the  two  points  where  the  right  (southern)  and  left 
(northern)  enclosing-sticks  (forming  the  two  sides  of  the  triangle, 
the  a])ex  of  which  lies  east  of  the  centre  of  the  fire)  meet  the 
western  enclosing-sdck  (as  the  base  of  the  triangle). 

2  The  first  verse,  in  point  of  fact,  contains  the  genitive  case  '  of 
the  waters.' 


2  54  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

the  year :    as  great  as  Agni  is,  as  great  as  is  his 
measure,  so  great  is  this. 

15.  Now,  some  yoke  it  (the  fire-akar)  at  a  Pra- 
ya/ziya  ^  Atiratra,  and  unyoke  it  at  an  Udayaniya, 
saying,  '  The  unyoking,  surely,  is  a  certain  form 
of  completion,  and  why  should  we  perform  a  form 
of  completion  prior  to  the  completion  (of  the  sacri- 
fice) ? '  But  let  him  not  do  this,  for  day  by  day  this 
sacrifice  is  performed,  and  day  by  day  it  comes  to 
completion  ;  day  by  day  he  yokes  that  (allar)  for  the 
attainment  of  the  heavenly  world,  and  day  by  day 
he  thereby  attains  the  heavenly  world  :  let  him  there- 
fore yoke  it  day  by  day,  and  unyoke  it  day  by  day. 

16.  And,  indeed,  it  would  be  just  as  if,  at  the 
Praya;^iya  Atiratra,  after  reciting  the  kindling- 
verses,  he  were  to  say,  '  Hereafter^,  at  the  Udaya- 
niya, I  shall  recite  (them  again)  !'  Let  him  there- 
fore yoke  (the  altar)  day  by  day,  and  unyoke  it  day 
by  day. 

17.  And  on  this  point,  Sandilya.,  indeed,  having 
enjoined  on  the  Kaiikatiyas  the  day-by-day  per- 

'  For  the  Praya;ziya  ish/i  (to  five  deities)  of  the  ordinary  Agni- 
sh/oma,  see  part  ii,  pp.  47,  48,  note.  In  the  present  case  a  special 
Soma-sacrifice  of  the  Atiratra  type  would  seem  to  take  its  place, 
just  as  the  Pavitra,  an  Agnish/oma  Soma-sacrifice,  at  the  Ra^asuya, 
took  the  place  of  the  ordinary  Anvarambha;nya  ish/i  (or  opening 
oflfering) ;  see  part  iii,  p.  42.  In  the  same  way  there  would 
apparently  be  a  special  Udayantya  Soma-sacrifice;  whilst  our 
author  would  have  the  ceremonies  of  yoking  and  unyoking  of 
the  fire-altar  performed  on  the  very  day  (or  days)  of  the  Soma- 
sacrifice,  that  is  to  say,  he  would  have  the  ordinary  Praya;ziyesh/i 
and  Udayaniyesh/i  performed  as  parts  of  the  principal  Soma-day 
(or  days,  if  there  are  to  be  more  than  one). 

^  Or,  therefore,  as  Saya«a  takes  it.  If  the  Udayaniya  were 
a  special  Soma-sacrifice,  the  Samidhenis  (part  i,  p.  102  seq. ;  ii, 
p.  13,  note  3)  would  have  to  be  recited  anew. 


IX  KANDA,    5  ADHYAYA,  I  BRAHMAA^A,  7.    255 

formance,  went  on  his  way,  saying,  *  Day  by  day 
they  shall  yoke  for  )ou,  and  day  by  day  they  shall 
unyoke  !  '  Let  him  therefore  yoke  day  by  day,  and 
unyoke  day  by  day. 

Fifth  Adhyaya.     First  Brahmaa?-a. 

1.  Now,  then,  as  to  the  taking  of  milk  as  fast- 
food  :  the  initiated  should  take  milk  for  his  fast- 
food.  Once  upon  a  time  the  nectar  of  immortality 
departed  from  the  gods. 

2.  They  said,  'Let  us  seek  for  it  here  by  toil  and 
penance  !  '  They  sought  for  it  by  toil  and  penance. 
Having  become  initiated,  they  were  living  on  fast- 
milk,  for  penance  it  is  when,  after  becoming  initiated, 
one  lives  on  fast-milk.     They  heard  the  sound  of  it. 

3.  They  said,  '  It  is  indeed  coming  nearer:  let 
us  practise  penance  still  further ! '  They  resorted 
to  three  teats  :  they  saw  it. 

4.  They  said,  '  It  is  indeed  coming  nearer  :  let  us 
practise  penance  still  further  ! '  They  resorted  to 
two  teats  :  they  saw  it  still  nearer. 

5.  They  said,  '  It  is  indeed  coming  nearer:  let  us 
practise  penance  still  further  ! '  They  resorted  to 
one  teat :  it  came  nigh  unto  them,  but  they  could 
not  lay  hold  of  it. 

6.  They  said,  '  It  has  indeed  come  nigh  unto  us, 
but  we  cannot  lay  hold  of  it  :  let  us  undergo  the 
whole  (practice  of)  penance!'  On  the  day  of  pre- 
paration they  underwent  entire  abstention  from 
food  ;  for  the  whole  (practice  of)  penance  it  is  when 
one  abstains  from  food:  let  him  therefore  eat  nothing 
on  the  day  of  preparation. 

7.  On  the  morrow,  having  laid  hold  of  it  and 
pressed  it  (the  Soma),  they  offered  (of  it)  in  the  fire, 


256  S'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

and  thereby  bestowed  immortality  upon  Agni.  And 
he,  Agni  (the  fire-altar),  indeed,  is  the  body  of  all 
the  gods;  and  hence,  when  they  bestowed  immortality 
on  Agni  (the  fire-altar),  they  bestowed  immortality 
on  their  own  selves,  and  thereby  the  gods  became 
immortal. 

8.  Now  that  same  nectar  of  immortality  is  Soma. 
And  even  to  this  day  the  Sacrificer  seeks  for  it  by 
toil  and  penance  ;  having  become  initiated  he  lives 
on  fast-milk  ;  for  penance  it  is  when,  after  being 
initiated,  one  lives  on  fast-milk  ;  he  hears  the  sound 
of  it,  saying,  '  On  such  and  such  a  day  the  bu)  ing 
(will  take  place  ') ! ' 

9.  He  resorts  to  three  teats  (of  the  cow) :  he  sees 
it.  He  resorts  to  two  teats  :  he  sees  it  nearer  by. 
He  resorts  to  one  teat  :  it  comes  nigh  to  him,  but 
he  cannot  lay  hold  of  it.  He  undergoes  entire 
abstinence  from  food  ;  for  the  whole  (practice  of) 
penance  it  is  when  one  abstains  from  food  :  let  him 
therefore  eat  nothing  on  the  day  of  preparation. 

10.  And,  on  the  morrow,  having  laid  hold  of  it, 
and  pressed  it,  he  offers  (of  it)  in  the  fire,  and 
thereby  bestows  immortality  on  Agni.  He  then 
drinks  (of  it),  and  thereby  bestows  immortality  on 
his  own  self,  and  becomes  immortal  ;  for  this, 
assuredly,  is  immortality  to  man  when  he  attains  the 
w^hole  (perfect)  life  :  and  so,  in  truth,  he  attains  the 
whole  life  by  this  self  of  his. 

11.  When  he  has  offered  in  the  fire,  he  drinks 
(Soma)  ;  for  that  (fire-altar)  is  his  divine  body,  and 
this  (Sacrificer's  own  body)  is  his  human  one  ;  and 

^  That  is,  the  buying  of  the  Soma  plants,  for  which  see  part  ii, 
p.  69  seq. 


IX    KANDA,   5   ADHYAYA,     I     BRAHMAA'A,     IJ.         257 

the   eods  were  first,  and  then   men  :    therefore  he 
drinks  (Soma),  after  offering  in  the  fire. 

I  2.  Now,  then,  the  discussion  of  the  Samish/aya^us 
(oblations).  The  gods  and  the  Asuras,  both  of  them 
sprung  from  Pra^apati,  entered  upon  their  father 
Pra^apati's  inheritance,  to  wit,  speech — truth  and 
untruth,  both  truth  and  untruth  :  they,  both  of 
them,  spake  the  truth,  and  they  both  spake  untruth  ; 
and,  indeed,  speaking  ahke,  they  were  aHke. 

13.  The  gods  rehnquished  untruth,  and  held  fast 
to  truth,  and  the  Asuras  rehnquished  truth,  and  held 
fast  to  untruth. 

14.  The  truth  which  was  in  the  Asuras  beheld 
this,  and  said,  '  Verily,  the  gods  have  relinquished 
untruth,  and  held  fast  to  truth  :  well,  then,  I  will 
go  thither  ! '     Thus  it  went  over  to  the  gods. 

15.  And  the  untruth  which  was  in  the  gods  beheld 
this,  and  said,  '  Verily,  the  Asuras  have  relinquished 
truth,  and  held  fast  to  untruth  :  well,  then,  I  will  go 
thither  ! '     Thus  it  went  over  to  the  Asuras. 

16.  The  gods  spake  nothing  but  truth,  and  the 
Asuras  nothing  but  untruth.  And  the  gods,  speak- 
ing the  truth  diligently,  were  very  contemptible, 
and  very  poor  :  whence  he  who  speaks  the  truth 
diligently,  becomes  indeed  very  contemptible,  and 
very  poor  ;  but  in  the  end  he  assuredly  prospers,  for 
the  gods  indeed  prospered. 

17.  And  the  Asuras,  speaking  untruth  diligently, 
throve  even  as  salt  soil  \  and  were  very  prosperous  : 
whence  he  who  speaks  untruth  diligentl}',  thrives 
indeed,  even  as  salt   soil,  and   becomes  very  pros- 

'  Both  salt  (V,  2,  I,  16;  VII,  I,  I,  6)  and  saline  soil  (VII,  3,  i, 
8)  mean  cattle. 

[43]  S 


258  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

perous ;    but    in    the    end    he    assuredly    comes    to 
naught,  for  the  Asuras  indeed  came  to  naught. 

18.  Now  that  same  truth,  indeed,  is  this  threefold 
lore  \  The  gods  said,  '  Now  that  we  have  made  up 
the  sacrifice,  let  us  spread  out  ^  this  truth  ! ' 

19.  They  prepared  the  Initiation-offering.  But 
the  Asuras  became  aware  of  it,  and  said,  '  Having 
made  up  the  sacrifice,  the  gods  are  now  spreading 
out  that  truth  :  come,  let  us  fetch  hither  what  was 
ours  ! '  The  Samish/aya^us  of  that  (off'ering)  was 
not  yet  performed,  when  they  arrived  :  whence 
people  offer  no  Samish/aya^us  ^  for  that  sacrifice. 
The  gods,  espying  the  Asuras,  snatched  up  the 
sacrifice,  and  began  doing  something  else  ^  They 
(the  Asuras)  went  away  again,  thinking,  '  It  is  some- 
thing else  they  are  doing.' 

20.  When  they  had  gone  away,  they  (the  gods) 
prepared    the    Opening-offering.       But    the    Asuras 

^  That  is,  the  Veda,  and  hence  the  sacrificial  ritual  as  the  sole 
end  for  which  the  three  collections  of  hymn-verses  {n'k),  hymn- 
tunes  (saman),  and  sacrificial  formulas  (ya^-us)  were  made. 

^  The  verb  '  tan,'  '  to  spread,'  is  the  regular  expression  for  the 
'  performing '  of  the  sacrifice, — a  figure  of  speech  taken  from  the 
spreading  out  of  a  web,  in  which  literal  sense  it  has  to  be  taken  here. 

^  See  III,  I,  3,  6,  where  the  injunction  is  given  that  no  Samish/a- 
ya^us  should  be  performed  for  the  Diksha«iyesh/i,  '  lest  he  who 
has  put  on  the  garment  of  initiation  should  reach  the  end  of  the 
sacrifice  before  its  completion ;  for  the  Samish/aya^us  is  the  end 
of  the  sacrifice.'  It  should  be  remembered  that  the  initiation- 
offering,  however  essential,  is  merely  a  preliminary  ceremony  of 
the  Soma-sacrifice,  at  the  end  of  which  latter  sacrifice  nine 
Samish/aya^us  oblations  are  offered  (IV,  4,  4,  i  seq.)  instead  of 
the  single  one  offered  at  the  ordinary  havirya^;7a.  The  term 
signifies  '  the  formula  (ya^us)  of  the  completed  offering  (samish/a).' 

*  Prof  Delbriick,  Altind.  Syntax,  p.  429,  makes  this  last  clause 
part  of  the  Asuras'  speech  or  thoughts, — '  one  thing  they  have  under- 
taken to  do,  and  another  they  are  doing.'   This  can  hardly  be  right. 


TX    KAiVDA,    5    ADHYAVA,     I    BRAHMAiVA,    2  2.         259 

became  aware  of  this  also.  The  .5'amyos  (formula) 
of  that  (offering)  had  been  pronounced,  when  they 
arrived  ;  whence  that  sacrifice  ends  with  the  .5amyos  \ 
The  gods,  espying  the  Asuras,  snatched  up  the 
sacrifice,  and  began  doing  something  else.  They 
went  away  again,  thinking,  '  It  is  something  else 
they  are  doing.' 

21.  When  they  had  gone  away,  they  (the  gods), 
having  bought  and  driven  about  the  king  (Soma), 
prepared  the  guest-offering  for  him.  But  the  Asuras 
became  aware  of  this  also.  The  Ida  of  that  (offering) 
had  been  invoked,  when  they  arrived  ;  whence  that 
sacrifice  ends  with  the  \d3.'\  The  gods,  espying 
the  Asuras,  snatched  up  the  sacrifice,  and  began 
doing  something  else.  They  went  away  again, 
thinking,  *  It  is  something  else  they  are  doing.' 

22.  When  they  had  gone  away,  they  (the  gods) 
spread  out  (performed)  the  Upasads  ^.  When  they 
had  recited  three  kindling-verses,  and  no  more, 
they  made  offering  to  the  deities,  but  laid  out  '^  no 
fore-offerings  and  no  after-offerings  on  either  side 
of  the  sacrifice,  for  they  were  in  too  great  haste 
at  that  time;  whence  at  the  Upasads,  when  he  has 
recited    three    kindling-verses,    and    no    more,    he 

'  See  III,  2,  3,  23,  where  it  is  stated  that  the  Prayamya  of  the 
Soma-sacrifice  is  to  end  with  the  ^Samyos  (or  6'amyuvaka,  for 
which  see  part  i,  p.  254  seq.);  the  Palnisa/^ya^as  (and  Samish/a- 
ya^us)  of  the  ordinary  ish/i  being  thus  omitted. 

^  For  the  Atithya,  see  part  ii,  p.  85  seq.  It  is  shorn  of  the 
after-offerings  (in  addition  to  the  Patnisa/«ya^as  and  Samish/a- 
ya^s). 

'  For  the  Upasads,  see  part  ii,  p.  104  seq. 

*  That  is,  performed  ;  but  the  verb  (ut-sadaya,  '  to  set  out,  or  in 
order ')  is  used  purposely,  as  if  laying  out  for  display, — so  as  to  be 
in  keeping  with  the  '  spreading  out '  of  the  sacrifice. 

S  2 


26o  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 


makes  offering  to  the  deities,  but  lays  out  no  fore- 
offerings  and  no  after-offerings  on  either  side  of  the 
sacrifice. 

23.  On  the  day  of  preparation  they  slaughtered 
the  x^gnishomiya  victim.  But  the  Asuras  became 
aware  of  this  also.  The  Samish/aya^'us  oblations  of 
this  (offering)  had  not  yet  been  offered,  when  they 
arrived  ;  whence  people  offer  no  Samish/aya^us  for 
this  animal(-offering).  The  gods,  espying  the 
Asuras,  snatched  up  the  sacrifice,  and  began  doing 
something  else.  They  went  away  again,  thinking, 
'  It  is  something  else  they  are  doing.' 

24.  On  the  next  morning  after  they  had  gone 
away,  they  (the  gods)  spread  out  (performed)  the 
morning-service  (of  the  Soma-sacrifice).  But  the 
Asuras  became  aware  of  this  also.  As  much  as 
the  morning-service  had  been  performed  of  it,  when 
they  arrived.  The  gods,  espying  the  Asuras, 
snatched  up  the  sacrifice,  and  began  doing  some- 
thing else.  They  went  away,  thinking,'  It  is  some- 
thing else  they  are  doing.' 

25.  When  they  had  gone,  they  (the  gods)  spread 
out  the  midday-service.  But  the  Asuras  became 
aware  of  this  also.  As  much  as  the  midday-service 
had  been  performed  of  it,  when  they  arrived.  The 
gods,  espying  the  Asuras,  snatched  up  the  sacrifice, 
and  began  doing  something  else.  They  went  away, 
thinking,  '  It  is  something  else  they  are  doing.' 

26.  When  they  had  gone,  (the  gods)  went  on 
with     the    animal-offering    of    the     Soma-sacrifice  ^ 

*  The  portions  from  the  Savaniya  pa^u,  which  is  slain  during 
the  morning-service,  continue  being  cooked  until  the  evening- 
service,  when  they  are  offered.  See  IV,  2,  5,  13;  and  part  ii, 
p.  357,  note. 


TX    KANDA,    5    ADHYAYA,    I    BRAHxMAiVA,    3O.        261 


But  the  Asuras  became  aware  of  this  also.  As 
much  of  this  animal-offering  as  is  done  (at  the 
evening-service)  had  been  done,  when  they  arrived. 
The  gods,  espying  them,  snatched  up  the  sacrifice, 
and  began  doing  something  else.  They  went  away, 
thinking,  '  It  is  something  else  they  are  doing.' 

27.  When  they  had  gone  away,  they  (the  gods) 
spread  the  evening-service  and  completed  it ;  and 
by  completing  it  they  obtained  that  whole  truth. 
Then  the  Asuras  went  down  \  Then  the  gods 
prevailed,  and  the  Asuras  came  to  naught.  And, 
indeed,  he  who  knows  this,  himself  prevails,  and  his 
spiteful  enemy  comes  to  naught. 

28.  The  gods  said, '  Those  sacrifices  of  ours  which 
are  half-completed,  and  leaving  behind  which  we 
went  off% — think  ye  upon  this,  how  we  may  com- 
plete them  ! '  They  said,  '  Meditate  ye  ! '  whereby, 
indeed,  they  meant  to  say,  '  Seek  ye  how  we  may 
complete  these  sacrifices  ! ' 

29.  Whilst  meditating,  they  saw  these  Samish/a- 
ya^us  (oblations),  and  offered  them,  and  thereby 
completed  those  sacrifices  ;  and  inasmuch  as  thereby 
they  completed  (sa/;^sthapaya)  them,  they  are  '  sa.m- 
sthitaya^us  ' ;  and  inasmuch  as  thereby  they  sacri- 
ficed completely  (sa;;^-ya^  •'),  they  are  '  samish/a- 
ya^us.' 

30.  Now  there  are  nine  such  (incomplete)  sacri- 


^  Literally,  leapt  down  (from  their  high  station). 

^  That  is,  which  we  left  behind  us  when  we  went  off. 

•*  Cf.  IV,  4,  4,  6.  For  whatever  deities  this  sacrifice  is  performed, 
ihey  all  are  thereby  '  sacrificed-to  together '  (sam-ish/a) ;  and  because, 
after  all  those  (deities)  have  been  '  sacrificed-lo  together,'  he  now 
offers  those  (libations),  therefore  they  are  called  Samish/aya^^us. 
See  also  I,  9,  2,  26,  with  note  thereto. 


262  S-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 


fices,  and  there  are  nine  samlsh/ayaf  us-oblations  ^ ; 
and  by  offering  these,  he  completes  those  sacrifices. 
He  offers  both  kinds,  those  of  the  Soma-sacrifice, 
and  those  of  the  Agni{-/('ayana), — first  those  of  the 
Soma-sacrifice,  and  afterwards  those  of  the  fire-altar: 
the  significance  of  this  has  been  explained. 

31.  Two  he  offers  of  the  fire-altar, — two-footed  is 
the  Sacrificer,  and  Agni  is  the  Sacrificer  :  as  great 
as  Agni  is,  as  great  as  is  his  measure,  with  so  much 
he  thus  completes  the  sacrifice.  [He  offers  them, 
with,  Vacr.  S.  XVIII,  56,  57],  'Sacrifice  hath 
been  offered  up  by  the  Bhr/gus  .  .  .;' — 'May 
Aeni  who  hath  received  sacrifice  and  oblation 
speed  our  offered  meat!' 

32.  These  two  amount  to  eleven, — the  Trish/ubh 
consists  of  eleven  syllables,  and  the  Trish/ubh 
means  strength  :  it  is  strength  he  thus  imparts  to  the 
Sacrificer. 

33.  And,  again,  as  to  why  there  are  eleven, — the 
Trishmbh  consists  of  eleven  syllables,  and  Indra  is 
of  trish/ubh  nature,  Indra  is  the  self  (soul)  of  the 
sacrifice,  Indra  is  the  deity  ^r  he  thus  finally  estab- 
lishes the  sacrifice  in  him  who  is  the  self,  the  deity 
of  the  sacrifice. 

34.  Having  performed  the  Samish/aya^us-obla- 
tions,  they  betake  themselves  to  the  expiatory  bath 
(avabh/ztha^).      Having   come   out   from   the   bath, 

^  That  is  to  say,  the  same  nine  Samish/aya^us-oblations  which 
are  performed  at  the  end  of  the  Soma-sacrifice  (IV,  4,  4,  i  seq.). 
At  the  end  of  these,  however,  two  additional  such  oblations  are 
offered  on  the  present  occasion. 

^  See  I,  4,  5,  4,  'Indra  is  the  deity  of  (this?)  sacrifice;'  IV,  4, 
2,  16,  'Indra  is  the  leader  of  the  sacrifice.'  The  first  of  the  nine 
Samish/aya^^us-oblations  of  the  Soma-sacrifice  is  offered  to  Indra. 

^  See  IV,  4,  5,  I  seq. 


IX  KAiVDA,   5  ADHYAYA,    I    BRAHMA^VA,   36.  263 


and  performed  the  Udayaniya  (concluding  obla- 
tion) \  he.  after  the  animal  cake  of  the  offering 
of  the  barren  cow  '\  prepares  oblations  for  the 
goddesses. 

35.  For  now  Pra^apati,  having  gained  his  end, 
thought  himself  quite  perfect.  Establishing  himself 
in  the  quarters  he  went  on  ordering  (or  creating) 
and  disposing  everything  here  ;  and  inasmuch  as  he 
went  on  ordering  and  disposing,  he  is  the  Orderer. 
And  in  like  manner  does  the  Sacrificer,  establishing 
himself  in  the  quarters,  order  and  dispose  everything 
here. 

36.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  prepares  these 
oblations.  This  Agni  (the  fire-altar)  is  the  quarters 
(regions),  and  these  he  lays  down  beforehand  (in 
the  shape  of)  the  bunch  of  Darbha  grass  ^  and  the 
clod-bricks  * ;  the  Pra;^abhr/ts  ^  in  the  first  layer, 
the  whole  of  the  second,  the  whole  of  the  third,  and 
the  whole  of  the  fourth  (layers  ^) ;  and  of  the  fifth 


'  See  IV,  5,  I,  I  seq. 

-  For  this  offering  to  Mitra  and  Varuwa,  see  IV,  5,  i,  5. 

^  The  bunch  of  Darbha  grass  is  placed  in  the  centre  of  the  newly 
ploughed  altar-site;  see  VII,  2,  3,  i  seq. 

*  The  four  logesh/akas  (clods  of  earth),  being  placed  at  the  ends 
of  the  two  '  spines/  represent  the  four  quarters,  marking  as  they  do 
the  centre  of  the  east,  south,  west,  and  north  sides  of  the  altar-site, 
sown  with  seeds  of  all  kinds;  see  VII,  3,  i,  13  seq.  The  bunch 
of  Darbha  grass,  placed  in  the  centre,  would  thus  represent  the 
fifth  region,  viz.  the  one  above. 

^  Though  the  Prawabhr/ts  are  said  to  represent,  not  the  regions, 
but  the  (channels  of  the)  vital  airs,  they  are  placed  in  rows  along 
the  diagonals  of  the  square  body  of  the  altar,  thus  marking,  as  it 
were,  the  intermediate  regions;  whilst  the  fifth  set  is  placed  in 
a  circle  round  the  centre.     See  VIII,  1,1,1  seq. 

•■•  The  bricks  of  these  layers  are  all  of  them  supposed  to  be 
marked  by  their  position  to  relate  to  the  regions  or  quarters. 


264  5ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 


layer  the  Asapatnas,  Nakasads  and  Pa^^'a/viWas  S  — 
these  kept  going  out  upwards  ^  (from  Pracrapati, 
the  akar).  Pra^apati  was  afraid  of  them,  thinking, 
'  Whilst  moving  away,  these  will  go  beyond  this 
universe.'  Having  become  the  Orderer,  he  went 
round  them  and  established  himself  in  them. 

2,'j.  Now  the  same  as  that  Orderer  is  yonder  sun  ; 
and  that  which  was  the  farthest  gone  of  the  regions 
is  that  in  which  that  (sun)  shines  firmly  established. 

38.  And  the  same  as  that  Orderer  is  this  cake 
to  the  Orderer  on  twelve  potsherds.  On  twelve 
potsherds  (it  is), — the  year  is  (of)  twelve  months, 
Praf-apati  is  the  year,  and  Pra^apati  is  the  Orderer. 
And  that  one  which  was  the  farthest  gone  of  the 
regions  is  the  same  as  these  previous  oblations, — 
a  pap  to  Anumati,  a  pap  to  Raka,  a  pap  to 
Sinivali,  and  a  pap  to  Kuhu=^:  when  he  prepares 
these  oblations,  he  thereby  establishes  him  (Pra^'a- 
pati)  in  that  which  was  the  farthest  gone  of  the 
regions.  That  (cake)  he  offers  whole,  for  the  com- 
pleteness of  that  (Pra^^apati). 

;9.  These  are  goddesses,  for  they  are  the  regions. 


3* 


^  For  the  Asapatnas,  laid  down  near  the  ends  of  the  spines,  to 
drive  off  evil  in  all  four  quarters,  see  VIII,  5,  1,  i  ;  for  the  other 
two  kinds  of  bricks,  expressly  identified  with  the  regions,  see  VIII, 
6,  I,  I  seq. 

"^  That  is,  the  altar  was  so  full  of  regions  that  they  escaped  at 
the  top. 

^  These  deities  are  supposed  to  be  personifications  of  the  four 
phases  of  the  moon;  whilst  Prof.  Weber  (Ind.  Siud.  XIII,  p.  290) 
would  also  take  the  Orderer  (dhatr/)- — by  the  Brahmawa  identified 
with  the  sun — to  represent  the  moon.  On  Sinivali  (identified  with 
Va/C',  VI,  5,  I,  9),  see  also  A.  Kuhn,  Zeitschr.  f.  v.  Sprachf.  II, 
p.  120;  Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  V,  230.  Anumati  is  identified  with  the 
earth,  V,  2,  3,  4. 


IX    KANDA,    5    ADHYAYA,    I    BRAHMAiVA,    4I.  265 

the  regions  are  the  metres,  and  the  metres  are 
deities ;  and  that  Ka  is  Pra^apati  ;  and  inasmuch 
as  they  are  goddesses  (devi)  and  Ka,  they  are 
'  devika//  ^'  There  are  five  of  them,  for  there 
are  five  regions. 

40.  As  to  this  they  say,  '  He  should  not  offer 
these  oblations,  lest  he  should  do  what  is  excessive.' 
Let  him  nevertheless  offer  them  ;  for  these  oblations 
are  offered  for  (the  fulfilment)  of  (special)  wishes, 
and  in  wishes  there  is  nothino;  excessive.  And 
whatever  oblation  is  offered  after  the  cake  of  the 
animal-offering  that  is  placed  inside  the  victim 
itself  as  its  sacrificial  sap.  He  offers  both  kinds 
(of  oblations),  those  of  the  Soma-sacrifice  and  those 
of  the  Agni(-/i'ayana),  to  wit,  first  those  of  the  Soma- 
sacrifice,  and  then  those  of  the  fire-altar :  the  signi- 
ficance of  this  has  been  explained.  The  cake- 
offering  of  the  animal  sacrifice  is  (performed)  in  a 
loud  voice,  and  these  (five  oblations)  in  a  low  voice, 
for  they  are  an  ish/i  -.  With  the  Pai-upuro^ai^a  he 
(the  Adhvaryu)  says,  'Recite! — Urge!'  and  with 
these  (oblations),  '  Recite  ! — Worship  !  '  for  they  are 
an  ish/i  -K  There  is  the  same  Svish/akr/t,  and  the 
same  \c/A*. 

41.  Of  that  same  animal-offering  (of  the  barren 
cow)  they  perform  the  Samish/ayaf  us-oblations  ; 
they  enter  the  expiatory  bath  with   the  heart-spit ''  ; 

^  This  is  an  etymological  quibble  resorted  to  in  order  to  account 
for  the  oblation  to  Pra_^apati  as  one  of  the  oblations  of  the  goddesses 
(devika). 

^  See  p.  248,  note  i.  ^  See  ibid.,  note  2. 

*  That  is,  for  these  five  oblations  whicli  are  inserted  between  the 
chief  oblations  and  the  Svish/akr/t  of  the  Pajupuro^Awa  ;  as  above, 
IX,  4,  3,  12  seq. 

'  For  this  expiatory  ceremony,  called  the  .Siilavabhrnha  (spit- 


266  ^ATArATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

for  this  animal-offering  is  the  end.    Having  proceeded 
with  the  heart-spit ; — 

42.  And  having  returned  (to  the  fire-altar),  he 
performs  the  oblations  to  Vii-vakarman ; — This 
Agni(-i'ayana)  indeed  (includes)  all  sacrificial  rites 
(vii-vani  karma/zi) ;  and  all  these  its  rites  have  been 
performed  in  this  (agni/^ayana)  :  he  now  gratifies 
them,  and  makes  them  a  deity  by  means  of  an 
offering  of  sacrificial  food ;  for  only  that  one  is 
a  deity,  for  whom  an  oblation  is  prepared,  but  not 
one  for  whom  it  is  not  (prepared).  Moreover,  this 
Agni  is  Vi^vakarman  (the  all-worker)  :  it  is  him  he 
thereby  gratifies. 

43.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  offers  the  Vaii-vakar- 
raana.  (oblations)  ^  For  the  fire-altar  there  is  both 
a  beginning  and  an  end  :  the  Savitra  ^  (formulas)  are 
the  beginning,  and  the  Vai^vakarma^^a  (oblations) 
the  end.  Were  he  to  offer  only  those  to  Savitr/, 
and  not  those  to  Vij"vakarman,  it  would  be  as  if 
he  made  only  a  beginning  and  no  end  ;  and  were 
he  to  offer  only  those  to  Vii^vakarman,  and  not 
those  to  Savitr/,  it  would  be  as  if  he  made  only 
an  end  and  no  beginning.  He  offers  both  of  them, 
and  thus  makes  both  a  beginning  and  an  end. 

44.  There  are  eight  of  those  (Savitra),  and  so 
(there  are  eight  of)  these :  thus  he  makes  the  end 

bath),  and  marking  the  conclusion  of  an  ordinary  {nirud/ia)  animal 
sacrifice — not  one  belonging  to  the  Soma-sacrifice — as  well  as  of 
the  offering  of  a  sterile  cow,  see  part  ii,  p.  215. 

^  Or,  perhaps,  formulas  ;  the  verses  used  along  with  the  oblations 
being  ascribed  to  Vijvakarman.  In  any  case,  however,  these  obla- 
tions are  offered  to  Agni,  as  the  Vijvakarman,  or  all-worker 
(vijvakartr/),  or  (in  the  case  of  Agni  =  AgniX'a}ana)  as  including 
all  works  (or  sacrificial  performances). 

-  See  VI,  3,  I,  I  seq. ;  part  iii,  p.  190  seq. 


IX    KAA^DA,    5    ADHYAYA,    I    BRAHMAA^A,    47.         26/ 

(the  same)  as  the  beginning-.  The  Sv^ha-call  is  the 
ninth  of  those  \  and  so  it  is  of  these  :  thus  he  makes 
the  end  as  the  beginning.  The  oblation  (ahuti) 
is  the  tenth  of  those  ^  and  so  it  is  of  these  :  thus  he 
makes  the  end  as  the  beo-innino-.  On  that  occasion 
he  offers  the  oblation  continuously  so  as  not  to 
stop  the  seed,  the  sacrifice  there  being  seed ; — on 
this  occasion  (he  offers)  with  the  dipping-spoon  at 
the  Svaha-call,  for  manifest  is  the  seed  when  it  is 
born. 

45.  [He  offers,  with, Vac.  S.  XVII,  58-65],  'What 
hath  flowed  from  out  of  the  w^ill,  or  the  heart, 
or  was  gathered  from  the  mind,  or  the  eye, 
after  that  go  ye  forward, — to  the  world  of  the 
righteous  whither  the  first-born  seers  went  of 
old  ! '  he  thereby  means  those  -Z^/shis  "'. 

46.  'Unto  thee,  O  (heavenly)  seat,  I  commit 
this  treasure  which  the  knower  of  beines  shall 
bring  thither"*!  Here  the  lord  of  the  sacrifice 
will  go  after  you  :  acknowledge  ye^  him  in  the 
highest  heaven!' — as  the  text,  so  the  meaning. 

47.  'Acknowledge   him,   O   ye  gods,  seated 

'  See  VI,  3,  I,  2  1. 

'^  The  Saviira  formulas  accompany  eight  Hbations,  which  form, 
however,  only  one  single  continuous  offering  (ahuti)  with  one 
svaha-call. 

*  For  the  seven  7?ishis,  identified  with  the  vital  airs,  the  first 
existing  beings,  see  VI,  1,1,1  seq. 

'  Mahidhara  (and  apparently  Sayawa)  seems  to  supply  'ya^a- 
manam'  to  'etam,'  and  construe  thus:  'Unto  thee,  O  heavenly 
sent,  I  commit  this  (Sacrificer),  which  treasure  6^atavedas  shall 
bring  thither.' 

■"'  '  O  gods,  honour  ye  him  (the  Sacrificer)  I '  Mahidhara  ;  but 
perhaps  the  /v'/shis  are  addressed  in  this  second  line.  Mahidhara 
takes  '  atra  '  ('  here  ')  along  with  '  parame  vyoman  ' — '  in  this  highest 
heaven.' 


268  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 


in  the  highest  heaven,  know  ye  his  form! 
When  he  cometh  by  the  godward  paths, 
reveal  ye  unto  him  the  fulfilment  of  his 
wishes!' — as  the  text,  so  the  meaning. — 'Awake, 
O  Ao-ni,  and  be  watchful!  .  .  .'—'Whereby 
thou  carriest  a  thousand,  .  .  .' — the  meaning  of 
these  two  has  been  explained  ^ 

48.  'With  grass-bunch  and  enclosing-stick, 
with  spoon,  altar-ground  and  grass-cover, 
with  verse  of  praise,  lead  thou  this  our  sacri- 
fice unto  heaven,  to  go  unto  the  gods  ! '  that  is, 
'with  these  outward  forms  of  our  sacrifice  make 
it  go  to  the  heavenly  world!' 

49.  'What  gift,  what  bounty,  what  fulfil- 
ment, what  offering-presents  there  are  of  ours, 
— Aeni  Vai^vakarma;/a  shall  deposit  them  in 
heaven  with  the  gods!'— that  is,  'whatever  we 
give,  seasonably  or  unseasonably,  that  this  fire- 
altar  of  Vijvakarman  shall  place  in  the  heavenly 
world  ! ' 

50.  'Where  the  streams  of  honey  and  ghee 
are  never-failing,— there,  in  heaven,  Agni  Vai- 
^vakarma//a  shall  place  us  with  the  gods!' — 
as  the  text,  so  the  meaning  -. 

51.  Eight  Vaiivakarma/^a  (oblations)  he  offers, — 
the  Gayatri  consists  of  eight  syllables,  and  Agni 
is  of  Gayatra  nature  :  as  great  as  Agni  is,  as  great 


'   SeeVIII,  6,  3,  23.  24. 

"^  The  meaning  of  the  verse  is,  however,  far  from  cerlain.  The 
above  is  Mahidhara's  interpretation,  except  that  he  takes  '  ya/2 '  to 
mean  '  and  what  (other)  streams  there  are.'  It  might,  however,  also 
mean — 'What  streams  of  honey  and  ghee  of  ours  are  never-fliiling 
anywhere — Agni  Vaii'vakarma;za  shall  deposit  ihem  in  heaven  with 
the  gods!' — in  which  case  due  reward  for  sacrifice  would  be 
prayed  for. 


IX    KAA'KA,    5    ADHYAVA,    I    BRAHMAiVA,   5^.         269 


as  is  his  measure,  by  so  much  food  he  thus  gratifies 
him. 

52.  When  he  has  performed  the  Vai.?vakarma;/a 
(oblations),  he  gives  a  name  '  (to  the  fire  of  the 
altar) ;  for  when  any  one  has  been  born  sound  and 
safe,  they  give  a  name  to  him,  and  now  this  (Agni) 
has  indeed  been  born  sound  and  safe. 

53,  Having  given  a  name  to  him,  he  reverently 

approaches    him  ;     for    this    (Sacrificer)    builds    him 

with  his  (own)  whole  self,  and  were  he  not  to  give 

utterance   now   to   this   surrender    of  his  own    self, 

he  (Agni)  would  now  take  away  his  (the  Sacrificer's) 

self ;    but   when    he    now   gives    utterance    to    this 

surrender  of  his  own  self,  he  (Agni)  does  not  take 

away  his   self.     [He  approaches   the  fire]  with  the 

Anush/ubh  verse  (Va<'.  S.  XVHI,  67),  'What  fires 

of  the  five  races  of  men  there  are  upon  this 

earth, — thou  art  the  chiefest  of  them  :  quicken 

us  unto  life  !' — the  Anush/ubh,  doubtless,  is  speech, 

and   all    the  metres   are   speech  -  :    he    thus    makes 

amends  to  him  (Agni)  by  all  the  metres.      Having 

stood  by  the  fire,  and  lifted  ^  it,  and  churned  it  out, 

he  offers  the  completing  oblation  ■*. 

'  According  to  VI,  1,  3,  20,  the  newly  built  Agni  is  to  be  called 
'  A'itra,'  the  Bright  one. 

■■^  Or,  are  Va^,  the  Veda,  cf.  1\',  6,  7,  i  seq. 

^  Or, '  having  mounted  it ; ' — that  is  to  say,  he  heats  the  churning- 
sticks  (ara«i)  at  the  altar-fire,  betakes  himself  with  them  to  the  old 
(Garliapatya)  fire-place;  'churns  out'  the  fire,  and  offers  on  the 
fire  thus  j)roduccd. 

*  The  Udavasaniya-ish/i,  consisting  of  a  cake  on  five  potsherds 
for  Agni  (or  a  libation  of  ghee  taken  in  five  ladlings  for  Vishz/u),  is 
the  same  as  for  the  Soma-sacrifice,  IV,  5,  i,  13.  But  whilst  there 
it  is  followed  at  once  by  the  (evening)  Agnihotra,  or  oblation  of 
milk  regularly  performed  twice  a  day;  on  the  present  occasion  an 
additional  oblation  is  performed. 


270  S'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

54.  He  then  offers  a  dish  of  clotted  curds  to 
Mitra  and  Varu;/a^  Now  he  who  performs  this 
(Agni-/C'ayana)  rite  comes  to  be  with  the  gods  ;  and 
these  two,  Mitra  and  Varu;^a,  are  a  divine  pair. 
Now,  were  he  to  have  intercourse  with  a  human 
woman  without  having  offered  this  (oblation),  it 
would  be  a  descent,  as  if  one  who  is  divine  would  be- 
come human  ;  but  when  he  offers  this  dish  of  clotted 
curds  to  Mitra  and  Varu;?a,  he  thereby  approaches 
a  divine  mate  -  :  having  offered  it,  he  may  freely 
have  intercourse  in  a  befitting  way. 

55.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  offers  this  dish  of 
clotted  curds  to  Mitra  and  Varu;/a.  When  Pra^a- 
pati  was  released,  the  seed  fell  from  him.  When  the 
gods  restored  him,  they,  by  means  of  this  dish  of 
clotted  curds,  put  seed  into  him  ;  and  in  like 
manner  does  this  (Sacrificer)  thereby  put  seed  into 
him. 

56.  Now  that  Pra^'apati  who  became  released  is 
this  very  fire-altar  which  is  here  being  built ;  and 
the  seed  which  fell  from  him  is  this  dish  of  clotted 
curds  of  Mitra  and  Varu;^a ;  for  Mitra  and  Varu;/a 
are  the  in-breathing  and  up-breathing,  and  the  in- 
breathing and  up-breathing  fashion  the  infused  seed. 
A  dish  of  clotted  curds  it  is,  because  seed  is  milk  ; 
and  sacrifice  it  is,  because  sacrifice  is  the  seed  of 
sacrifice.  In  a  low  voice  it  is  (offered),  for  silently 
seed  is  shed.  At  the  end  (of  the  sacrifice)  it  is 
(offered),  for  from  the  end  seed  is  introduced. 

'  The  same  payasya-oblation  is  performed  at  the  Dakshayawa 
modification  of  the  new  and  full-moon  sacrifice  (II,  4,  4,  10  seq.) ; 
see  also  the  Sannayya  of  the  new-moon  sacrifice  (part  i,  p.  178, 
note  4)  which  is  the  same  dish. 

"^  Or,  he  enters  into  a  divine  union. 


IX    KAA'DA,    5    ADHYAYA,     I     BRAHMAATA,    6\.        27 1 


57.  They  proceed  with  the  whey  ^  of  that  (dish 
of  clotted  curds).  At  this  (oblation  of  whey)  he 
gives  a  dakshi;/a  (sacrificial  gift) :  '  Let  him  give 
a  pair  of  hornless  he-goats,'  so  (they  say)  ; — '  Only 
by  assignment,  I  think  '^ : '  said  Mahitthi.  And, 
verily,  this  libation  of  the  fire-builder  flows  away 
as  a  libation  of  Soma  which  one  offers  on  a  (fire) 
without  bricks. 

58.  He  need  only  lay  down  the  naturally-per- 
forated (bricks)  ^ ;  for  the  naturally-perforated  ones 
are  these  worlds ;  and  this  built  fire-altar  is  the 
same  as  these  worlds. 

59.  He  need  only  lay  down  the  seasonal  (bricks) ; 
for  the  seasonal  ones  are  the  year,  and  this  built 
fire-altar  is  the  year. 

60.  He  need  only  lay  down  the  all-light  (bricks); 
for  the  all-light  (bricks)  are  those  deities  ^  and  this 
built  fire-altar  is  those  deities. 

61.  He  need  only  lay  down  the  Puna.<r/^'iti ;  for 
this  is  a  repeated  sacrifice  (punar-ya^^za),  it  is  a  later 
(higher)  worship  of  the  gods  :  it  is  thus  a  repeated 
sacrifice  and  the  higher  worship  of  the  gods  he 
thereby  arranges,  and  the  repeated  sacrifice  inclines 
to  him  ■' ! — so   (they  say),  but   let  him   not   do  this. 


'  The  whey  (vagina)  is  offered  to  the  (divine)  Coursers,  i.e.  the 
regions  or  quarters  ;  see  II,  4,  4,  22-25. 

"^  Tlie  meaning  of  this  passage  is  not  quite  clear  to  me. 

'  The  three  Svayamatr/w/as  in  the  centre  of  the  first,  third,  and 
fifth  layers  represent  the  three  worlds.  These,  and  the  subsequent 
injunctions,  refer  to  one  who,  subsequent  to  the  AgniX-ayana,  wishes 
to  perform  a  Soma-sacrifice,  without  being  able  to  repeat  the  Agni- 
^ayana  itself     Katy.  St.  XVIII,  6,  33. 

*  See  VI,  3,  3,  16;  5,  3,  where  the  three  Vijva^yotis  bricks  are 
said  to  represent  Agni,  Vayu  (wind),  and  Adiiya  (sun)  respectively. 

*  Though  there  is  nothing  in  the  text  to  show  where  this  quota- 


272  S-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

for,  indeed,  whenever  Agni  is  placed  on  the  built 
(altar),  this  whole  Agni  passes  into  that  very  brick  ^ : 
thus  whenever  he  offers  in  the  fire,  then  these 
oblations  of  his  will  be  offered  even  as  would  be  his 
oblations,  when  offered  on  a  complete  ^'a/z^ila  fire- 
altar  built  up  with  wings  and  tail. 

62.  And,  indeed,  he  who  carries  about  Agni^ 
becomes  pregnant  with  all  beings,  and  with  all  the 
ofods  ;  and  he  who  builds  him  when  he  has  not  been 
carried  about  for  a  year  kills  all  beings  in  the  form 
of  an  embryo.  But,  surely,  he  who  kills  a  human 
embryo,  is  despised,  how  much  more  then  he  who  kills 
him  (Agni),  for  he  is  a  god  :  '  Let  no  one  become 
an  officiating  priest  for  an  (Agni)  who  has  not  been 
carried  about  for  a  year,'  said  Vatsya,  '  lest  he 
should  be  a  participator  in  the  killing  of  this, 
a  god's  seed  ^ ! ' 

tion  begins,  it  would  seem,  from  Katyayana's  rules,  that  it  runs 
from  the  beginning  of  paragraph  58, — XVIII,  6,  33.  In  case  of 
inability  (to  perform  a  second)  /^itya,  at  a  repeated  Soma-sacrifice, 
(he  may  lay  down)  one  or  other  kind  of  the  Svayamatr^wwas, 
Vijva^yotishas,  or  7?/tavyas  ;  34.  The  Puna^Z'iti ;  35.  Or  no  build- 
ing (at  all  a  second  time) ;  36.  Because  the  (Agni)  A^itya  has 
become  the  Ahavaniya. 

'  That  is  (as  would  seem  from  Saya«a's  interpretation),  into  the 
Ahavantya  fire,  considered  as  the  last  brick  of  the  altar ;  and  hence 
the  Sacrificer's  oflering-fire  will  for  ever  thereafter  remain  for  him 
the  Altya  Agni. 

^  During  the  time  of  initiation  (diksha),  which,  if  at  all  possible, 
is  to  last  for  a  year,  the  Ukhya  Agni  has  to  be  carried  about  by  the 
intending  Sacrificer,  for  at  least  part  of  each  day,  in  the  fire-pan 
(ukha),  suspended  in  a  sling  from  his  neck ;  the  pan-fire  being 
afterwards  transferred  to  the  newly  built  Garhapatya  and  thence 
to  the  great  fire-altar,  to  serve  as  the  A'itya  Agni,  or  the  Ahavaniya 
fire.     See  VI,  7,  i,  12  seq. 

^  In  the  original  this  last  clause  is  in  the  first  person,  or  in  the 
oratio  directa,  from  the  point  of  view  of  him  who  is  asked  to  officiate 


IX   KANDA,   5  ADIIYAYA,   I   BRAHMAiVA,    66.         273 

63.  '  A  six-month  (Agni)  is  the  last  ^  he  may- 
build/  they  say,  *  for  six-month  embryos  are  the 
last  ^  that  live  when  born.'  If  he  were  to  recite  the 
Great  Litany  on  one  not  carried  for  a  year,  he  should 
recite  (only)  the  eighties  of  verses ;  for  something 
incomplete  is  (the  Agni)  not  carried  for  a  year,  and 
something  incomplete  are  the  eighties  of  verses  ^ 
But,  indeed,  he  would  only  still  further  pull  asunder 
that  (Agni,  already)  pulled  asunder  ^ ;  and,  indeed, 
whether  he  (Agni)  be  carried  for  a  year,  or  not 
carried  for  a  year,  he  (the  Hotri)  should  recite  the 
whole  of  the  Great  Litany. 

64.  Now  ^'a^^^ilyayana  was  once  upon  a  time 
sojourning  in  the  eastern  region.  Daiyampati 
said  to  him,  '  Sa.7idi\ya.y3.n3.,  how  is  Agni  to  be  built? 
For,  indeed,  we  are  loth  to  carry  him  for  a  year, 
and  yet  we  wish  to  build  him.' 

65.  He  said,  'Let  him  by  all  means  build  him 
by  whom  he  has  previously  been  carried  for  a  year  ; 
for  that,  that  (Agni)  alone  he  builds  as  one  that  has 
been  carried^  (as  a  child  in  the  womb).' 

66.  And,  indeed,  let  him  by  all  means  build  who 

as  a  priest,  hence — Let  no  one  become  an  officiating  priest  .  .  .  , 
thinking,  '  Lest  I  should  be  a  participator  .  .  .  .' 

^  That  is  to  say,  he  must  have  been  carried  about  for  at  least  six 
months ;  and  embryos  less  than  six  months  old  cannot  live. 

'■^  This  is  so  for  the  reason  that  the  Mahad  uktham  consists  of 
more  than  the  eighties  of  verses;  see  IX,  3,  3,  19.  One  might 
feel  inclined  to  include  this  whole  sentence  in  the  preceding 
quotation. 

^  That  is,  already  too  much  attenuated,  by  being  made  as  large 
as  one  a  year  old  (?). 

*  Sayawa  remarks,  that  this  reply  docs  not  restrict  the  building 
of  the  fire-altar  to  one  who  has  carried  the  fire  for  a  full  year,  but 
only  discountenances  the  building  in  the  case  of  one  who  has  only 
carried  it  for  a  few  days  (?). 

[43]  T 


2  74  SATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 


intends  to  press  Soma  for  a  year,  for  he,  manifestly, 
supports  him  by  food  (in  the  shape  of)  those 
Hbations. 

67.  And,  indeed,  let  him  by  all  means  build  who 
offers  the  Agnihotra  for  a  year,  for  he  who  offers 
the  Agnihotra  indeed  supports  him  (Agni,  the  fire). 

68.  And,  indeed,  let  him  by  all  means  build  who 
was  born  a  year  (after  conception) ;  for  Agni  is  the 
breath  :  it  is  thus  him  (Agni)  he  holds.  And, 
indeed,  as  the  breath,  he  enters  into  the  infused 
seed,  and  takes  possession  of  it ;  and  inasmuch  as 
he  takes  possession  (vid)  of  every  one  that  is  born 
(^ata),  he  is  ^^atavedas.  Wherefore  by  all  means 
let  even  one  who  knows  this  build  him  as  one  ever 
carried  (within  him).  And,  indeed,  if  one  who 
knows  this  either  drinks  (Soma),  or  offers  drink  to 
any  one  else,  these  libations  of  his  will  be  offered 
even  as  would  be  his  libations,  when  offered  on 
a  complete  Sandils.  fire-altar  built  up  with  wings 
and  tail. 

Second  BRAHMAiVA. 

1.  Indra  saw  this  seven-versed  (hymn,  suitable) 
for  making  good  what  is  deficient^  for  reducing  what 
is  redundant,  and  for  perfecting  what  is  imperfect. 
And,  indeed,  after  building  the  fire-altar,  one  is  (still) 
apt  to  get  into  trouble,  or  to  stumble,  or  what  not. 
Now,  when  SysLpavna  Sayakayana  heard  this, 
he  ventured  upon  this  performance. 

2.  Now,  there  is  here  a  perfecting  of  three  things, 
— the  perfecting  of  the  fire-altar,   the  perfecting  of 

'  Viz.  in  the  building  of  the  fire-altar ;  Hierally,  for  the  obtain- 
ment  of  the  deficient. 


IX    KAA'ZJA,    5    ADHYAYA,    2    BRAHMAA'A,    4.         275 

him  who  has   it  built   for   him,   and   the   perfecting 
of  him  who  builds  it. 

3.  Thus,  when  he  reverently  stands  by  (the  altar) 
with  this  (hymn),  everything  is  thereby  made  good^ 
for  him  that,  knowing  or  unknowing,  he  either  does 
in  excess,  or  does  not  carry  to  the  end,  in  this 
building  of  the  altar — in  short,  whatever  was  not 
secured  for  him.  And  whatever  wish  there  is  in 
that  anush/ubh  verse-,  that  he  secures  even  now; 
and,  moreover,  he  thereby  keeps  off  the  fiends,  the 
Rakshas,  from  this  sacred  work,  and  they  do  not 
wreck  him,  whilst  uttering  imprecations.  Wherefore 
one  who  knows  this  may  readily  build  a  fire-altar 
even  for  an  enemy,  for  he  is  able  to  gain  the  better 
of  him. 

4.  [He  approaches  reverently  the  fire-altar^,  with, 
Va^.  S.  XVIII,  68-74],  'For  mighty  strength 
that  smiteth  Vr/tra,  and  for  victory  in  battle, 
we  call  thee  hither,  O  Indra!'  'O  much-in- 
voked Indra,  crush  thou  the  handless  Ku/^aru, 
lurking  here,  together  with  the  Danus;  and 
with  might  smite  thou  the  footless  Vr/tra, 
the  ever-growing  mocker!'  thus  he  reverently 
stands  by  (the  fire)  with  the  first  two  (verses)  relating 
to  the  slaying  of  Vr/tra.  For  now  the  gods,  having 
warded  off  Vr/tra,  evil,  performed  this  rite  freed 
from  evil ;  and  in  like  manner  does  the  Sacrificer, 
having  warded  off  Vr/tra,  evil,  now  perform  this  rite 
freed  from  evil. 

^  Literally,  obtained. 

'^  Viz.  the  first  of  the  seven  verses  (^/g-vcda  III,  37,  i). 

'  According  to  Katy.  ^'r.  XVII,  7,  i,  this  ceremony  should  take 
place  on  the  completion  of  each  layer,  after  it  has  been  covered 
with  loose  earth;  cf.  paragraph  11. 

T  2 


276  i-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 


5.  'Scatter  thou  our  scorners,  O  Indra'!' — 
'Like  a  terrible,  creeping  beast,  dwelling  in 
the  mountains,  hast  thou  come  from  the 
farthest  distance  :  having  sharpened  thy 
pointed,  piercing  thunderbolt^  O  Indra,  beat 
thou  off  the  foes,  and  scatter  the  spurners!' 
thus  with  the  second  two  (verses)  relating  to  (Indra) 
Vimr/dh^  For  now  the  gods,  having  warded  off" 
the  spurners,  evil,  performed  this  rite  freed  from  evil ; 
and  in  like  manner  does  the  Sacrificer  now,  having 
warded  off  the  spurners,  evil,  now  perform  this  rite 
freed  from  evil. 

6.  'May  Agni  Vaii-vanara  come  forward 
from  afar  to  our  help,  to  hear  our  hymns  of 
praise!' — 'Sought  after  in  the  sky,  sought 
after  on  earth,  Agni,  sought  after,  hath  en- 
tered all  the  plants:  Agni  Vai^vanara,  sought 
after,  may  guard  us  from  injury  by  day  and  by 
night!'  thus  with  the  third  two  (verses)  relating  to 
(Agni)  Vai^vanara.  For  now  the  gods,  having,  by 
Vai^vanara,  burnt  out  evil,  performed  this  rite,  freed 
from  evil ;  and  in  like  manner  does  the  Sacrificer 
now,  by  Vaii^vanara,  burn  out  evil,  and  perform  this 
rite  freed  from  evil. 

7.  'May  we  obtain  this  wish,  O  Agni,  with 
thy  help!  may  we  obtain,  O  wealthy  one, 
wealth  with  abundant  heroes!  striving  for 
strength,  may  we  obtain  strength;  may  we 
obtain  undecaying  glory,  O  thou  ever-young!' 
thus  with  one  (verse)  containing  wishes.     For  now 


\  For  the  complete  verse,  see  IV,  6,  4,  4. 

^  Thus  Mahidhara. 

^  That  is,  the  repeller  of  spurners,  or  enemies. 


IX  KANDA,    5  ADHYAYA,  2  BRAHMAA'A,  9.    277 

the  gods,  having,  by  the  six-versed  (hymn),  warded 
off  evil,  made  once  for  all,  by  the  one  wish-holding 
(verse),  all  (objects  of)  wishes  their  own  ;  and  in  like 
manner  does  the  Sacrificer  now,  having,  by  the  six- 
versed  (hymn),  warded  off  evil,  make  once  for  all, 
by  the  one  wish-holding  (verse),  all  wishes  his  own. 

8.  It  is  (a  hymn)  of  seven  verses,— the  fire-altar 
consists  of  seven  layers,  (and  there  are)  seven 
seasons,  seven  regions,  seven  w^orlds  of  the  gods, 
seven  stomas,  seven  pr?sh/^a  (samans),  seven  metres, 
seven  domestic  animals,  seven  wild  ones,  seven  vital 
airs  in  the  head,  and  whatever  else  there  is  of  seven 
kinds,  relating  to  deities  and  relating  to  the  self, — 
all  that  he  thereby  secures.  They  become  equal  to 
the  Anush/ubh\  for  the  Anush/ubh  is  speech,  and  it 
is  by  speech  that  he  secures  for  him  (Agni)  all  that 
W'hich  is  not  yet  secured  for  him. 

9.  '  Let  him  approach  (the  fire-altar)  with  an  eight- 
versed  (hymn)!'  say  some; — 'with  (Va^.  S.  XVIII, 
75).  "We  thereby  offer  unto  thee  thy  wish, 
reverently  approaching  thee  with  open  hands: 
with  holiest  mind  and  peaceful  thought  offer 
thou  sacrifice  unto  the  gods  as  priest,  O 
Agni!"  thus  with  a  second  wish-holding  one, — and 
the  seven  foregoing  ones,  that  makes  eight, — the 
Gayatri  consists  of  eight  syllables,  and  Agni  is  of 
Gayatra  nature:  as  great  as  Agni  is,  as  great  as  is 
his  measure,  by  so  much  he  thus  secures  for  him 

'  The  seven  verses  consist  of  two  Gayatris  (twenty-four  syllables 
each),  four  Trish/ubhs  (forty-four  each),  and  one  Anush/ubh  (thirty- 
two  syllables).  Whilst  the  two  Gayatris  are  sixteen  syllables  short 
of  two  Anush/ubhs,  the  four  Trish/ubhs  have  forty-eight  syllables 
in  excess  of  four  Anush/ubhs.  Hence  the  seven  verses  consist  of 
8  X32  syllables,  or  eight  Anush/ubhs. 


278  i-ATArATHA-BRAHMAA^A. 


whatsoever  is  not  yet  secured  for  him  ;  and  thus, 
moreover,  the  two  deities^  receive  the  same  (amount) 
for  their  share.'  Let  him,  however,  not  do  so,  for 
surely  those  seven  (verses)  are  (equal  to)  eight 
anush^'ubh  (verses),  and  thus  he  even  therein  obtains 
whatever  wished-for  object  there  is  in  the  eight- 
versed  (hymn). 

10.  With  (verses)  addressed  to  Indra  and  Agni 
he  approaches  (the  fire); — the  fire-altar  belongs  to 
Indra  and  Agni:  as  great  as  Agni  is,  as  great  as  is 
his  measure,  by  so  much  he  thus  gains  for  him  what- 
ever has  not  been  gained  for  him.  And  Indra  and 
Agni  are  all  the  gods,  and  the  fire-altar  belongs  to 
(or  Agni  is)  all  the  deities:  as  great  as  Agni  is,  as 
great  as  is  his  measure,  by  so  much  he  thus  gains 
for  him  whatever  has  not  been  gained  for  him. 

1 1.  Now  some  make  this  (hymn)  the  opening  rite 
of  every  performance,  saying,  '  Freed  from  evil,  we 
must  perform  this  sacred  work  !'  And  others,  indeed, 
say,  '  Let  him  approach  reverently  (each)  la)  er  when 
it  is  covered  with  soil,  for  therein  that  (layer) 
becomes  whole  and  complete.'  Let  him,  then,  do  as 
he  chooses.  So  much  as  to  the  building ;  now  as  to 
the  non-building. 

1 2.  Verily,  there  are  three  oceans, — the  Fire-altar 
(being  the  ocean)  of  Ya^us-formulas,  the  Mahavrata 
(-saman)  -  that  of  Samans  (hymn-tunes),  and  the 
Mahad  uktham  (Great  Litany  ^)  that  of  Rik  (verses). 
Whoever   performs  these   (three   rites)   for  another 


^  Viz.   Indra   and   Agni,    having   each    four   verses    addressed 
lo  them. 

^  See  p.  282,  note  5. 

'  See  p.  1 10,  note  3  ;  p.  1 1 1,  note  i. 


IX    KANDA,    5    ADHYAYA,    2    BRAHMAA'A,    l6.        279 

person  causes  these  oceans  to  dry  up  for  himself, 
and  after  them,  thus  drying  up,  the  metres  ^  dry  up 
for  him  ;  and  after  the  metres  the  world ;  and  after 
the  world  his  own  self;  and  after  his  own  self  his 
children  and  cattle:  indeed,  he  who  performs  these 
for  another  person  becomes  poorer  day  after  day. 

1 3.  And  he  who,  not  having  performed  these 
(rites)  for  another  person,  were  to  officiate  in  the 
performance  even  of  all  other  sacrifices,  for  him  the 
metres  again  replenish  themselves  from  out  of  those 
oceans,  and  after  the  metres  the  world,  and  after  the 
world  his  own  self,  and  after  his  own  self  his  chil- 
dren and  cattle  :  indeed,  he  who  does  not  perform 
those  rites  for  another  person,  becomes  more  pros- 
perous day  after  day.  For,  indeed,  these  (rites)  are 
his  divine,  immortal  body ;  and  he  who  performs 
them  for  another  person,  makes  over  to  another 
his  divine  body,  and  a  withered  trunk  is  all  that 
remains. 

14.  Now,  some  (say),  '  Having  performed  them 
for  another  person,  they  either  perform  them  for 
themselves  or  cause  them  to  be  performed  again  : 
this  is  the  atonement.'  But  let  him  not  do  this, 
for  it  would  be  as  if  one  were  to  water  a  withered 
trunk;  it  would  rot  and  die:  let  him  know  that 
there  is  no  atonement  for  such  an  one. 

15.  And  Sa.ucfi\ya.  once  upon  a  time  said — Tura 
Kavasheya  once  built  a  fire-altar  for  the  gods  at 
Karoti.  The  gods  asked  him,  'Sage,  seeing  that 
they  declare  the  building  of  the  fire-altar  not  to  be 
conducive  to  heaven,  why  then  hast  thou  built  one  ?  ' 

16.  He    said,    'What    is    conducive    to    heaven, 


'  That  is,  tlie  Vedic  texts. 


28o  ^-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 


and  what  is  not  conducive  thereto  ?  The  Sacrificer 
is  the  body  of  the  sacrifice,  and  the  officiating 
priests  are  the  Hmbs ;  and,  surely,  where  the  body 
is  there  are  the  hmbs ;  and  where  the  hmbs  are 
there  is  the  body.  And,  verily,  if  the  priests 
have  no  place  in  heaven,  then  the  Sacrificer  has 
none,  for  both  are  of  the  same  world.  But  let 
there  be  no  bargaining  as  to  sacrificial  fees,  for  by 
bargaining  the  priests  are  deprived  of  their  place  in 
heaven.' 


X    KAA^DA,    I    ADHYAYA,     I     BRAIIMA7VA,    3.         28 1 


TENTH     KANDh. 


THE  MYSTERY  OF  AGNI,  THE  FHIE-ALTAR. 


First  Adhyaya.     First  BRAHMAiVA. 

1.  In  the  first  place  that  Agni  (the  Fire-altar), 
the  year,  is  built  ^ ;  thereafter  the  Great  Litany 
(mahad  uktham)  is  recited  2.  When  Pra^apati 
became  relaxed,  the  vital  fluid  flowed  upwards  ^ 

2.  Now,  that  Pra^apati  who  became  relaxed  is 
the  year ;  and  those  joints  of  his  which  became 
relaxed  are  the  days  and  nights. 

3.  And  that  Pra^apati  who  became  relaxed  is 
this  very  Fire-altar  which  here  is  built ;  and  those 
joints  of  his,  the  days  and  nights,  which  became 
relaxed  are  no  other  than  the  bricks ; — thus,  when 
he  lays  down  these  (in  the  layers  of  the  altar),  he 
thereby  restores  to  him  those  joints  of  his,  the  days 
and  nights,  which  had  become  relaxed  :    and  thus 

^  Or,  possibly,  '  that  Agni  is  built  in  a  year,'  as  paragraph  4 
might  seem  to  suggest.  Saya;/a,  however,  takes  it  in  the  above 
sense, — esho^gni^  Sawvatsaratmaka//  purastat  purvaw  X'iyate.  The 
AgniX'ayana,  when  properly  performed,  requires  a  full  year,  whence 
Agni-Pra^apati  is  constantly  identified  with  the  year  and  the 
seasons. 

'^  According  to  Sayaz/a,  the  intermediate  Mahavrata-saman  (see 
note  I,  p.  283),  chanted  prior  to  the  recitation  of  the  jNIahad  uktham, 
is  likewise  implied  here. 

^  Thus— urdhvalokam  agaHV^at — Sayawa  takes  '  agram.' 


282  5'ATAPATHA-BKAHMAA^A. 

it  is   even   in   this   (building  of  the  ahar)   that  this 
Ya^crus  is  buih  up  ^  and  secured  (for  Prai,'apati). 

4.  And  that  vital  fluid  (essence)  of  his  which 
flowed  upwards  (became)  the  Great  Litany  :  it  is 
in  quest  of  that  vital  fluid  that  (the  priests)  go  by 
means  of  the  Rik  and  Saman.  And  when  the 
Ya^^us  marches  in  front  in  this  (quest)  ^,  it  is  in 
order  to  fetch  something  that  that  (Veda)  goes — 
even  as  (one  might  say),  '  That  one  thing  there 
is  mine,  I  wnll  fetch  it,'  so  does  that  Ya^us  go  in 
front  (or  forward).  That  (vital  fluid)  they  obtain 
in  the  course  of  a  ^ear  ^. 

5.  The  Adhvaryu  takes  (draws)  it  by  means  of 
the  Graha  (Soma-cup)  ;  and  inasmuch  as  he  thereby 
takes  (grah)  it,  it  is  (called)  Graha  ^.  The  Udgat/7' 
puts  the  vital  fluid  into  it  by  means  of  the  (saman 
of  the)   Great   Rite  (mahavrata  •") ;  but,  indeed,  the 

^  Viz.  inasmuch  as  ya^'-us-formulas  have  to  be  used  with  the 
laying  down  of  many  of  the  bricks  (the  so-called  '  ya^ushmatis '). 
Whilst,  in  the  case  of  the  Rik  and  Saman,  other  rites  are  neces- 
sary to  secure  them  for  the  restored  Pra^apati,  the  Ya^us  is 
secured  for  him  in  the  very  act  of  building  up  his  body,  the 
fire-altar. 

^  The  Adhvaryu  priest  has  to  do  all  the  practical  work  connected 
with  the  sacrificial  performance,  the  building  of  the  altar,  &c. ;  and 
inasmuch  as  it  is  with  ya^us-formulas  he  does  so  throughout,  the 
Ya^us  is  said  here  to  take  the  lead ;  cf.  X,  3,  5,  3. 

^  Viz.  by  means  of  the  sacrificial  session  of  sacrificing,  chanting, 
and  reciting,  called  'Gavam  ayanam'  (procession  of  the  cows), 
lasting  for  one  year,  on  the  last  day  but  one  of  which  the  Maha- 
vrata, or  Great  Rite,  is  performed. 

^  The  particular  cup  of  Soma  here  referred  to  is  the  Mahdvrattya- 
graha,  the  special  cup  of  the  Great  Rite;  cf.  X,  4,  i,  12  seq. 

°  The  central  feature  of  the  IMahavrata  consists  in  the  chanting, 
at  the  mid-day  service — as  the  Hotr/"s  Pr/shZ/^a-stotra — of  the 
so-called  Mahavrata-saman.  It  consists  of  five  different  parts 
which, — like  those  of  which  the  IMahad  uktham,  recited  after  it,  is 


X    KANDA,     I    ADHYAYA,    I     BRAHMAiVA,    5.  283 


(sciman  of  the)  Great  Rite  is  (equivalent  to)  all  these 
(other)  samans  (hymn-tunes)  :  it  is  thus  by  means 
of  all  the  hymn-tunes  that  he  puts  the  vital  fluid 
therein.  The  Hotr/  puts  the  vital  fluid  therein 
by  means  of  the  Great  Litany  ;  but,  indeed,  the 
Great  Litany  is  the  same  as  all  these  ri/e  (hymn- 
verses)  ^  :  it  is  thus  by  means  of  all  the  hymn-verses 
that  he  puts  the  vital  fluid  into  it  (the  Soma-cup). 

composed, — are  considered  as  representing  different  parts  of  Agni- 
Pra^apati's  body,  viz. :  i.  Gayatra-saman,  representing  the  head  ; 
it  is  clianted  in  the  trivm-sloma  (nine-versed  hymn-form)  and  con- 
sists of  the  triplets,  Sama-v.  II,  146-8  (=  i?/g-veda  I,  7,  1-3: 
indram  id  gathiro  b/Yhat),  11,  263-5  (indro  dadhU'o  asthabhir), 
and  II,  800-2  (ud  ghed  abhi  jrulamagham)  ;  though,  according 
to  others,  the  Sama-lriplets  corresponding  to  i?/g-veda  I,  7,  1-9 
may  be  chanted  instead.  2.  Rathantara-saman  (Sama-v.  II, 
30-1),  representing  the  right  wing,  chanted  in  the  Pa/l/l-adaj-a- 
stoma,  or  fifteen-versed  form.  3.  Br/hat-saman  (II,  159-60), 
the  left  wing,  in  the  Saj)tadaja-stoma,  or  seventcen-versed  form. 
4.  Bhadra-saman  (on  II,  460-2  ;  cf.  Calc.  ed.,  vol.  v,  p.  402),  the 
tail,  in  the  Ekaviwj-a,  or  twenty-one-versed  form.  5.  Ra^^ana- 
saman  (on  II,  833-5;  cf.  Calc.  ed.,  vol.  v,  p.  449),  the  body  (at- 
man),  in  the  Pa;7X'avi77/ja-stoma,  or  twenty-five-versed  form ;  instead 
of  this  the  Vamadevya-saman  (on  II,  32-4)  may  be  chanted  in 
the  pa;7/(-anidhana  form  (Calc.  ed.,  vol.  v,  p.  451). — The  chanting  of 
this  Stotra  is  preceded  by  the  singing  of  thirteen  samans,  called  par  i- 
mada/i  (see  X,  i,  2,  8),  followed  by  certain  ceremonies — buckling 
armour  on  a  nobleman,  driving  in  a  sunwise  direction  round  the 
sacrificial  ground,  shooting  arrow's  at  two  ox-hides,  beating  of  drums, 
&c. — apparently  symbolising  the  driving  off  of  evil  spirits  from  the 
sacrifice,  or  a  combat  for  the  possession  of  (the  light  of)  the  sun. 
The  chanting  itself  is,  according  to  some  authorities,  performed  by 
the  Udgatr/s,  whilst,  according  to  others,  all  the  priests  (except  the 
Hot/-/,  for  whom  the  Maitravaruwa  acts),  as  well  as  the  Gr/hapati, 
or  Sacrificer,  take  part  in  turn  in  the  singing  of  the  samans;  the 
Prastotr/  and  Pratihartr/,  assistants  of  the  Udgatr/,  joining  in  with 
the  successive  performers  in  the  Nidhanas,  or  finales. 

'  See  p.  no,  note  3;  p.   112,   note   i.     During  his  recitation 
of  the  Great  Litany,  the  Hotr/ is  seated  on  a  swing,  the  Adhvaryu 


284  S'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

6.  When  those  (Udgat/Vs)  chant  (the  stotra), 
and  when  he  (the  Hotrz)  recites  (the  ^astra)  after- 
wards, then  he  (the  Adhvaryu)  offers  that  (vital 
fluid,  in  the  form  of  Soma)  unto  him  (Agni- 
Pra^apati)  at  the  Vasha/-call  ;  and  thus  this  vital 
fluid  enters  him.  For,  indeed,  they  do  not  see  it 
to  be  the  Great  Rite  that  lies  there  being  praised, 
nor  the  Great  Litany,  but  it  is  Agni  alone  they  see  ; 
for  Agni  is  the  self  (body),  and  thus  those  two,  the 
Rik  and  the  Saman,  enter  him  in  the  form  of  the  vital 
fluid  ;   and  thus  they  both  enter  (join)  the  Ya^us. 

7.  Now,  that  Agni  (fire-altar)  consists  of  pairs — 
the  first  layer  and  the  second,  and  the  third  and 
fourth  ;  and  of  the  fifth  layer  the  fire  which  is  placed 
on  the  built  (altar)  is  the  mate.  And,  indeed,  this 
body  consists  of  pairs, 

8.  The  thumbs  (and  great  toes,  '  aiigushZ/^a,'  m.) 
are  males,  and  the  fingers  and  toes  ('  anguli,'  f.) 
females  ;  the  ears  ('  kar/^a,'  m.)  are  males,  and  the 
eyebrows  ('  bhrCi,'  f.)  females ;  the  lips  ('  osh///a,'  m.) 
are  males,  and  the  nostrils  ('  nasika,'  f.)  females  ;  the 
teeth  ('  danta,'  m.)  are  males,  and  the  tongue  ('^ihva,' 
f.)  is  a  female  :  indeed  the  whole  (body)  consists  of 
pairs,  and  with  this  body,  consisting  of  pairs,  that 
(vital  fluid)  enters  this  Agni  (the  fire-altar),  con- 
sisting of  pairs  \ 

9.  This,  then,  is  the  entering  therein  ; — even 
thus,  indeed,  he  (Agni)  consists  of  pairs  ^ ;  but  in  this 

making  his  responses  whilst  standing  on  a  plank,  and  the  Hotr/'s 
assistants  being  seated  on  bundles  of  grass, 

^  Or,  with  this  body  as  a  mate  it  thus  enters  this  Agni,  its  mate ; 
literally,  with  this  body  forming  one  of  a  (productive)  pair,  it  thus 
enters  this  Agni,  forming  one  (i.  e.  the  other)  of  a  pair. 

^  That  is,  he  has  in  him  the  generative  energy.     Apparently 


X    KANDA,     I     ADIIYAYA,   2  BRAHMAiVA,     I.  285 


way  also  he  consists  of  pairs  : — the  fire-altar  here 
built  up  is  no  other  than  this  speech,  for  with 
speech  it  is  l)uilt  up  ;  and  the  fire  which  is  placed 
on  the  built  (altar)  is  the  breath  ;  and  the  breath 
('  pra/^a,'  m.)  is  the  male,  the  mate,  of  speech  ('  va/c,'  {.). 
And,  indeed,  this  body  is  speech  ;  and  the  breath 
which  is  in  the  body  is  its  mate  :  with  this  mated 
body  that  (vital  fluid)  thus  enters  into  the  mated 
Agni. 

10.  This  also  is  the  entering  therein; — there 
is  indeed  no  fear  of  him  (Agni)  being  without 
offspring  to  whosoever  thus  knows  these  two,  the 
body  and  Agni,  to  be  a  pair  ;  but,  indeed,  this  body 
is  food,  as  is  said  by  the  Rishl  (y?/g-veda  X,  107,  7), 
'  The  Dakshiwa  winneth  food  which  is  our  own  self 
(breath).' 

11.  Now,  this  food,  when  eaten,  becomes  of  two 
kinds, — that  part  of  it  which  is  immortal  (remains) 
above  the  navel :  by  the  upward  vital  airs  it  moves 
upwards  and  enters  the  air  ;  but  that  part  of  it 
which  is  mortal  tends  to  move  away :  it  passes 
beyond  the  navel,  and,  having  become  twofold, 
enters  this  (earth),  as  urine  and  faeces.  Now  that 
which  enters  this  (earth)  enters  the  fire-altar  ^  built 
here  ;  and  that  which  enters  the  air  enters  that  fire 
which  is  placed  on  the  built  (altar).  This  also  is 
the  entering  therein. 

Second    Braiimaa'a. 
I.  Pra^apati  was  desirous  of  gaining  these  worlds. 
He    saw    this    bird-like   body,    the    Fire-altar:    he 

'  mithuna,'  m.  has  also  the  sense  of  '  paired,' '  mated,' i.e.  'one  who 
has  his  complement  or  mate,'  and  so  perhaps  here. 

^  Viz.  inasmuch  as  the  altar  is  built  on  the  earth,  and  the  latter 
forms  its  foundaiion.     Comm. 


286  S-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

fashioned  it,  and  thereby  gained  this  (terrestrial) 
world.  He  saw  a  second  bird-like  body,  the  (chant 
of  the)  Great  Rite  ^  :  he  fashioned  it,  and  thereby 
gained  the  air.  He  saw  a  third  bird-like  body,  the 
Great  Litany  ^  :  he  fashioned  it,  and  thereby  gained 
the  sky. 

2.  This  built  F'ire-altar,  doubtless,  is  this  (terrestrial) 
world,  the  Great  Rite  the  air,  and  the  Great  Litany 
the  sky  :  all  these,  the  Fire-altar,  the  Great  Rite, 
and  the  Great  Litany,  one  ought  therefore  to 
undertake  together,  for  these  worlds  were  created 
together ;  and  as  to  why  the  Fire-altar  is  built  first, 
it  is  because  of  these  worlds  this  (terrestrial)  one 
was  created  first.     Thus  with  regard  to  the  deity. 

3.  Now  with  regard  to  the  body.  The  Fire-altar 
is  the  mind,  the  (chant  of  the)  Great  Rite  the 
breath,  and  the  Great  Litany  speech  :  all  these 
one  oueht  therefore  to  undertake  tooether,  for 
mind,  breath,  and  speech  belong  together ;  as  to 
why  the  Fire-altar  is  built  first,  it  is  because  the 
mind  is  prior  to  the  breathings. 

4.  The  Fire-altar,  indeed,  is  the  body  (trunk), 
the  Great  Rite  the  breath,  and  the  Great  Litany 
speech  :  all  these  one  ought  therefore  to  undertake 
together,  for  body,  breath,  and  speech  belong 
together  ;  and  as  to  why  the  Fire-altar  is  built 
first,  it  is  because  of  him  who  is  produced  the  trunk 
is  produced  first. 

5.  The  Fire-altar,  indeed,  is  the  head,  the  Great 
Rite  the  breath,  and  the  Great  Litany  the  body  : 

^  The  Mahavrata-saman  and  the  Mahad  uktham,  as  we  have 
seen  (p.  282,  note  5;  p.  iii,  note  i),  are  constructed  so  as  to 
correspond  to  the  different  parts  of  the  bird-hke  Agni-Pra^apati. 


X    KANDA,     I     ADHYAYA,    2    BRAHMAA^A,   J.  287 

one  ought  therefore  to  undertake  all  these  together, 
for  head,  breath,  and  body  belong  together ;  and  as 
to  why  the  Fire-altar  is  built  first,  it  is  because 
of  him  who  is  born  the  head  is  born  first ;  and 
hence,  whenever  all  these  are  undertaken  toeether 
the  Great  Litany,  indeed,  is  accounted  the  highest 
(atamam)  \  for  the  Great  Litany  is  the  body 
(or  self,  atman). 

6.  As  to  this  they  say,  '  If  all  these  are  difficult 
to  obtain  together,  what  (means  of)  obtaining  them 
is  there?' — In  the  6^yotish/oma  (form  of  the) 
Agnish/oma  - :  let  him  perform  offering  with  the 
C^yotish/oma  Agnish/oma. 

7.  In  this  6'yotish/oma  Agnish/oma  the  Bahish- 
pavamana  (stotra)  is  (in)  the  Trivr/t  (stoma) — 
that  is  the  head  of  the  rite ;  the  two  odier  Pava- 
manas  are  (in)  the  Pa?1/'adam  and  Saptada^a 
(stomas) — they    are    the    two    wings  ;    the     Hotr^'s 


^  The  combination  '  atamaw  khyayate '  is,  as  it  were,  the  super- 
lative of  '  a-khyayate ; '  of.  anutama?//  gopayati,  X,  5,  2,  10;  and 
Delbriick,  Altind.  Syntax,  p.  194. 

"^  The  Agnish/oma  may  be  performed  in  three  different  modes, 
according  to  the  variation  of  stomas  (or  hymn-forms)  employed 
for  the  stotras  (or  chants).  In  the  Gyotish/oma  the  order  of 
stomas  is  that  set  forth  in  paragraph  7,  viz.:  a.  Bahishpavamana- 
stotra  in  the  Trivr/t  (nine-versed);  b.  A^}a-stolras,  and  c.  I\Ia- 
dhyandina-pavamana-stotra,  in  the  Pa/zX-ada^a  (fifteen-versed)  ;  d. 
PnshMa-stotras,  and  e.  Arbhava-pavamana-stotra,  in  the  Saptada^a 
(seventeen-versed) ;  and  f.  Agnish/oma-saman  (Ya^>%a^;7iya) 
in  the  Ekaviw/.ya  (twenty-one-versed)  stoma,  or  hymn-form.  In  the 
Gosh/oma,  on  the  other  hand,  the  succession  of  stomas  is 
a.  PaT/X'ada.va,  b.  Trivr/t,  c.  d.  Saptada-^a,  e.  f.  ]*;kavi///ja  ; 
and  in  the  Ayush/oma:  a.  Trivm,  b.  Pa«X'ada.s-a,  (c.  d.)  Sap- 
tada^a,  (c.  f.)  Ekaviraja.  Cf.  jiart  ii,  p.  402,  note  4  ;  for  the  scheme 
of  Stotras  (and  ^astras),  ib.  p.  325,  note  2.  The  Agnish/oma  is 
singled  out  here  for  the  reason  that  the  Mahavrata-day  takes 
the  form   cf  an  Agnisli/oma  sacrifice. 


288  DATAPATH  A-BRAHMAiV  A. 

A^a  (stotra)  is  (in)  the  Pa^'l-^adai'a,  the  Pr/shMa 
(stotra  in)  the  Saptada.^a,  and  the  Ya^/laya^vliya 
(stotra  in)  the  Ekavimss.  (stoma) — they  are  the  tail. 
8.  Now  these  two,  the  Fa^H'ada^a  and  Saptada^a, 
have  thirty-two  hymn-verses  :  twenty-five  of  these 
are  the  twenty-five-fold  body  ^ ;  and  the  seven  which 
remain  over  are  the  Parimad  (samans),  for  these  are 
the  cattle  (or  animals),  (for)  cattle  are  sporting  all 
around    us    (pari-mad  ^) — thus    much,    then,    is    the 

^  See  p.  1 68,  note  3. 

^  Saya«a   takes  '  parimad '   here  in  the  sense  of  '  a  source  of 
pleasure   all   around' — parito   harshahetava/;. — The    Parimada>^ 
are  thirteen  Samans  sung  (not  chanted,  in  the  proper  sense  of  the 
word)  by  the  Udgdtr/,   his  two  assistants  joining  merely  in  the 
Nidhanas  of  chorus-like   passages.     They  are  given,  figured  for 
chanting,  in  the  Ara;;yagana  of  the  Sama-veda  (Calc.  ed.,  ii,  p.  387 
seq.).     This  performance  takes  place  immediately  after  the  Adh- 
varyu  has  given  the  sign  for,  and  the  Udgatn' '  yoked,'  the  Maha- 
vrata-stotra  or  saman  (i.e.  the  Hotn's  Pr/shZ/^astotra  of  the  Great 
Rite), — or,  according  to  some  authorities,  before  cither  the  'yoking,' 
or  the  Adhvaryu's  summons, — and  thus  serves  as  an  introduction 
to  the  central  and  chief  element  of  the  Great  Rite,  the  Mahavrata- 
saman.     According   to   the   ritual  symbolism,    these    preliminary 
samans  are  intended  to  supply  the  newly  completed  Pra^apati  with 
hair  (feathers)  and  nails;  but  the  performance  would  rather  seem  to  be 
a  solemn  mode  of  doing  homage  (upasthanam)  to  the  different  parts 
of  the  bird-like  altar  and  the  sacrificial  ground  ;  thus  corresponding 
to   a  similar,   though  simpler,   ceremony  performed  on  the  com- 
pletion of  the  fire-altar  in  its  simplest  form,  as  described  at  IX,  i,  2, 
35-43-    On  the  present  occasion  the  ceremony  is  performed  in  the 
following  order:   i.  near  the  head  of  the  altar  (the  Ahavaniya  fire) 
he  sings  the  Prawa  ('breath;'  Sama-v.,vol.  ii,  p.  436);  2.  near  the 
tail  the  Apana  (downward-breathing,  ii,  p.  437);    3.  4.  near  the 
right    and    left  wing  the   two  Vratapakshau  (ii,  p.  438) ;  5.  near 
the  left  armpit  the  Pra^apati-hr/daya  ('  heart  of  Pra^.,'  ii,  p.  499) ; 
6.  near   the  A'atvala  or  pit,   the  VasishZ/^asya  Nihava   (Sama-v., 
vol.  V,  p.  602);   7.  near  the  Agnidhra   hearth   the   Satrasyarddhi 
('  success   of  the   sacrificial  session,'   ii,   p.  465) ;    8.  9.  in    front 
and  behind  the  Havirdhana  carts,  the  Sloks.  and  Anujloka  (i,  pp. 


X  KANDA,     I  ADHYAYA.  3  BRAHMAA^A,  T.    289 

Great    Rite :    thereby  he   obtains    the    Great    Rite 
even   in  this  (Agnish/oma). 

9.  And  the  Hotri  recites  seven  metres — each 
subsequent  one-versed  (metre)  increasing  by  four 
(syllables) — with  the  Viraf  as  an  eighth  :  these 
(eight)  consist  of  three  eighties  and  forty-five 
syllables.  Now  by  the  eighties  thereof  the  eighties 
(of  the  mahad  uktham)  ^  are  obtained,  for  the  Great 
Litany  is  counted  (or  recited)  by  eighties  (of 
triplets)  ;  and  of  the  forty-five  (syllables  which 
remain)  twenty-five  are  this  twenty-five-fold  body  ^ ; 
and  where  the  body  is  there,  indeed,  are  (included) 
the  head,  and  the  wings  and  tail ;  and  the  twenty 
(syllables  which  remain)  are  the  insertion  ^  ; — thus 
much,  then,  is  the  Great  Litany  :  thereby  he  obtains 
the  Great  Litany  even  in  this  (Agnish/oma).  All 
these  (three)  are  indeed  obtained  in  the  6^yotish/oma 
Agnish/oma :  let  him,  therefore,  perform  offering 
with  the  6^yotish/oma  Agnish/oma. 

Third  Brahmaa^a. 

I.  Pra^apati  created  living  beings.  From  the 
out-  (and  in-)  breathings  he  created  the  gods,  and  from 
the  downward  breathings   the   mortal  beings  ;    and 

887-9);  lo-  towards  the  Mar^aliya  the  Yama  (ii,  p.  461); 
II.  12.  in  front  and  behind  the  Sadas,  the  Ayus,  and  Nava- 
stobha  (ii,  pp.  450-51);  13.  in  front  of  the  Garhapatya  the  J^i's- 
yasya  saman  (ii,  p.  324). 

'  See  p.  112,  note  i. 

"^  Viz.  the  body,  as  consisting  of  the  ten  fingers,  the  ten  toes, 
the  arms  and  legs,  and  the  trunk. 

^  Towards  the  end  of  the  INIahad  Uklliam,  in  ilie  portion 
representing  the  thighs,  nine  trish/ubh  verses  (i?/g-veda  III,  43,  1-8, 
and  X,  55,  5)  are  inserted  as  an  'avapanam.' 

[43]  U 


290  i-ATAPATIlA-BRAHMAiVA. 

above  the  (mortal)  beings  he  created  Death  as  their 
consumer. 

2.  Now,  one  half  of  that  Pra^^apati  was  mortal, 
and  the  other  half  immortal :  with  that  part  of  him 
which  was  mortal  he  was  afraid  of  death ;  and, 
being  afraid,  he  became  twofold,  clay  and  water,  and 
entered  this  (earth). 

3.  Death  spake  unto  the  gods  saying,  '  What  has 
become  of  him  who  has  created  us  ? ' — ■'  Being  afraid 
of  thee,  he  has  entered  this  (earth),'  they  said.  He 
spake,  '  Let  us  search  for  him,  let  us  gather  him  up 
for  I  shall  not  injure  him.'  The  gods  gathered  him 
from  out  of  this  (earth)  :  that  part  of  him  which  was 
in  the  water,  they  gathered  as  water,  and  that  which 
was  in  this  (earth,  they  gathered)  as  clay.  Having 
gathered  together  both  clay  and  water,  they  made 
a  brick,  whence  a  brick  consists  of  both  clay  and 
water. 

4.  And,  indeed,  these  five  forms  (bodily  parts)  of 
him  are  mortal — the  hair  on  the  mouth,  the  skin,  the 
flesh,  the  bone,  and  the  marrow ;  and  these  are  im- 
mortal— the  mind,  the  voice,  the  vital  air,  the  eye, 
and  the  ear. 

5.  Now,  that  Pra^apati  is  no  other  than  the  Fire- 
altar  which  is  here  built  up,  and  what  five  mortal 
parts  there  were  of  him,  they  are  these  layers  of 
earth  ;  and  those  which  were  immortal  they  are 
these  layers  of  bricks. 

6.  The  gods  spake,  '  Let  us  make  him  immortal ! ' 
Having  encompassed  that  mortal  form  by  those  Im- 
mortal forms  of  his,  they  made  it  immortal — the 
layer  of  earth  by  means  of  two  layers  of  bricks  :  in 
like  manner  the  second,  the  third,  and  the  fourth 
(layers  of  earth). 


X    KANDA,     I     ADHYAYA,    3    BRAHMAiVA,     I O.        29I 

7.  And  having  laid  down  the  fifih  layer  (of  bricks), 
he  (the  Adhvaryu)  scatters  earth  on  it ;  thereon  he 
lays  the  Vikar;/i  and  the  Svayamat77;/;^a,  scatters 
chips  of  gold,  and  places  the  fire  :  that  is  the  seventh 
layer,  and  that  (part)  is  immortal ;  and  in  this  way. 
having  encompassed  that  mortal  form  of  his  by 
those  two  immortal  forms,  they  made  it  immortal, — 
the  layer  of  earth  by  means  of  two  layers  of  bricks. 
Thereby,  then,  Pra^'apati  became  immortal  ;  and  in 
like  manner  does  the  Sacrificer  become  immortal  by 
making  that  body  (of  the  altar)  immortal. 

8.  But  the  gods  knew  not  whether  they  had  made 
him  complete,  or  not ;  whether  they  had  made  him 
too  large,  or  left  him  defective.  They  saw  this 
verse  (Va^.  S.  XVIII,  76),  'The  seat-hiding 
Agni,  Indra,  god  Brahman,  Br/haspati,  and 
the  wise  All-gods  may  speed  our  sacrifice 
unto  bliss !' 

9.  Of  this  (verse)  one  part  is  Agni's,  one  part 
Indra's,  and  one  part  the  All-gods' ; — with  that  part 
thereof  which  is  Agni's  they  made  up  that  part  of 
him  (Pra^apati)  which  is  Agni's,  and  with  Indra's 
(part)  that  which  is  Indra's,  and  with  the  All-gods' 
(part)  that  which  is  the  All-gods'  :  in  this  very  (fire- 
altar)  they  thus  made  him  up  wholly  and  com- 
pletely. 

10.  And  when  he  stands  by  (the  altar,  worshipping- 
it)  with  this  (verse),  he  thereby  secures  (makes 
good)  all  that  part  of  him  (Pra^apati)  which, 
whether  he  knows  it  or  not,  he  either  does  in  excess 
or  insufticiendy  in  this  (fire-altar), — whatever  has 
not  been  secured  for  him.  The  '  seat-hiding  '  (verse) 
is  an  Anush/ubh,  for  the  Anush/ubh  is  speech,  and 
the   seat-hider  is  speech  :    it  is  by  speech   that  he 

u  2 


292  5'ATAPATHA-BRAIIMAA^A. 

secures  for  him  what  was  not  secured  for  him. 
'  Let  him  approach  (the  altar  with  this  verse)  when 
he  has  covered  a  layer  with  earth,'  say  some,  '  for 
then  that  (layer)  becomes  whole  and  complete.' 

Fourth  BRAHMAivA. 

1.  Now,  at  the  beginning,  Pra^apati  was  (com- 
posed of)  both  these,  the  mortal  and  the  immortal — 
his  vital  airs  alone  v*^ere  immortal,  his  body  mortal : 
by  this  sacrificial  performance,  and  by  this  order 
of  proceeding,  he  made  his  body  uniformly  unde- 
caying  and  immortal.  And  in  like  manner  is  the 
vSacrificer  (composed  of)  both  the  mortal  and  the 
immortal — his  vital  airs  alone  are  immortal,  his 
body  mortal :  by  this  sacrificial  performance,  and 
by  this  order  of  proceeding,  he  makes  his  body 
uniformly  undecaying  and  immortal. 

2.  He  lays  down  the  first  layer, — this,  doubtless, 
is  his  out-  (and  in-)  breathing  ^  and  it  is  an  im- 
mortal (element),  for  the  out-breathinor  is  something- 
immortal  :  this,  then,  is  an  immortal  layer.  He 
then  scatters  loose  soil  thereon, — this,  doubtless,  is 
his  marrow,  and  it  is  a  mortal  (element),  for  the 
marrow  is  mortal :  he  establishes  it  on  that  im- 
mortal (element),  and  thereby  this  part  of  him 
becomes  immortal. 

3.  He  lays  down  the  second  layer, — this,  doubt- 
less, is  his  downward  breathino-,  and  it  is  an  immortal 
(element),  for  the  downward  breathing  is  something 
Immortal  :  this,  then,  is  an  immortal  layer.  He 
thus    encompasses    that    mortal    (element)   on   both 

'  That  is,  the  breath-proper,  of  the  mouth  and  nose,  passing 
upward  into  the  air  from  the  middle  of  the  body. 


X  KANDA,     I  ADHYAVA,  4  BRAHMAA^A,  6.    293 


sides  by  an  immortal  one,  and  thereby  that  part 
of  him  becomes  immortal.  He  then  scatters  loose 
soil  thereon, — this,  doubtless,  is  his  bones,  and  it  is 
a  mortal  (element),  for  the  bone  is  mortal  :  he 
establishes  it  on  that  immortal  (element),  and  thereby 
this  part  of  him  becomes  immortal. 

4.  He  lays  down  the  third  layer, — this,  doubtless, 
is  his  through-breathing  \  and  it  is  an  immortal 
(element),  for  the  through-breathing  is  something 
immortal :  this,  then,  is  an  immortal  layer.  He 
thus  encompasses  that  mortal  (element)  on  both 
sides  by  an  immortal  one,  and  thereby  that  part 
of  him  becomes  immortal.  He  then  scatters  loose 
soil  thereon, — this,  doubtless,  is  his  sinews,  and  it 
is  a  mortal  (element),  for  the  sinew  is  mortal :  he 
establishes  it  on  that  immortal  (element),  and  thereby 
this  part  of  him  becomes  immortal. 

5.  He  lays  down  the  fourth  layer, — this,  doubtless, 
is  his  upward  breathing  '\  and  it  is  an  immortal 
(element),  for  the  upward  breathing  is  something- 
immortal  :  this,  then,  is  an  immortal  layer.  He  thus 
encompasses  that  mortal  (element)  on  both  sides 
by  an  immortal  one,  and  thereby  that  part  of  him 
becomes  immortal.  He  then  scatters  loose  soil 
thereon, — this,  doubtless,  is  his  flesh,  and  it  is  a 
mortal  (element),  for  flesh  is  mortal :  he  establishes 
it  on  that  immortal  (element),  and  thereby  this  part 
of  him  becomes  immortal. 

6.  He  lays  down  the  fifth  layer, — this,  doubtless. 


^  The  Vyana,  through-breaihing,  or  circulating  air,  is  ihe  vital 
air  which  serves  the  upward  air  (or  out-  and  in-breathing,  pra«a)  and 
downward  air  (apana).     IMaitryup.  II,  6  (Cowell). 

'  Or,  outward  breathing, — 'That  which  belches  forth  or  keeps 
downwards  the  food  eaten  or  drunken,  this  is  the  udana  ; '  Cowell,  ib. 


294  i'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiV-A. 

is  his  central  (or  pervading)  breathing  ^  and  it  is 
an  immortal  (element),  for  the  central  breathing  is 
something  immortal  :  this,  then,  is  an  immortal 
layer.  He  thus  encompasses  that  mortal  (element) 
on  both  sides  by  an  immortal  one,  and  thereby  that 
part  of  him  becomes  immortal.  He  then  scatters 
loose  soil  thereon, —  this,  doubtless,  is  his  fat,  and 
it  is  a  mortal  (element),  for  the  fat  is  mortal  :  he 
establishes  it  on  that  immortal  (element),  and  thereby 
this  part  of  him  becomes  immortal. 

7.  He  lays  down  the  sixth  layer, — this,  doubtless, 
is  his  voice,  and  it  is  an  immortal  (element),  for  the 
voice  is  something  immortal :  this,  then,  is  an  im- 
mortal layer.  He  thus  encompasses  that  mortal 
(element)  on  both  sides  by  an  immortal  one,  and 
thereby  that  part  of  him  becomes  immortal.  He 
then  scatters  loose  soil  thereon, — this,  doubtless,  is 
his  blood  and  his  skin,  and  it  is  a  mortal  (element), 
for  blood  is  mortal,  and  skin  is  mortal :  he  establishes 
it  on  that  immortal  (element),  and  thereby  this  part 
of  him  becomes  immortal. 

8.  These,  then,  are  six  layers  of  bricks,  and  six 
layers  of  earth,  that  makes  twelve, — the  year  (con- 
sists of)  twelve  months,  and  Agni  is  the  year  :  as 
great  as  Agni  is,  as  great  as  is  his  measure,  with 
so  much  did  Pra^apati  then  make  his  body  uni- 
formly undecaying  and  immortal ;  and  in  like  manner 
does  the  Sacrificer  now  make  his  body  uniformly 
undecaying  and  immortal. 

9.  Having  then  laid  down  the  Vikar;n  and  Sva- 
yamatrz;^/^a,   he   scatters  chips   of  gold,  and  places 

'  '  The  Samana  (equalizing  air)  distributes  the  digested  pieces 
through  the  limbs.'     Maitryup.  II,  6  (Cowell). 


X    KANDA,    I     ADHYAYA,    4    BRAHMAiVA,     T  2.  29; 


the  fire  thereon :  Pra^apati  then  finally  made  a 
golden  form  for  his  body ;  and  inasmuch  as  (he  did 
so)  finally,  this  was  the  final  form  of  his  body ; 
whence  people  speak  of  '  the  golden  Pra^apati  \' 
And  in  like  manner  does  the  Sacrificer  now  finally 
make  a  golden  form  for  his  body ;  and  inasmuch  as 
(he  does  so)  finally,  this  is  the  final  form  of  his 
body  ;  and  hence,  whether  they  know  this  or  not, 
people  say  that  the  Agni/'it  (he  who  has  built  an 
altar)  is  born  in  yonder  world  as  one  made  of  gold  \ 

10.  Now,  on  this  point,  SaJidWya.  and  Saptara- 
thavfihani,  teacher  and  pupil,  were  once  disputing 
with  one  another :  '  This  is  his  form,'  said  SAndilys. ; 
'  his  hair,'  said  Saptarathavahani. 

11.  SsL?idi\ycL  said,  'Surely,  there  is  a  hairy  form 
(as  well  as)  a  hairless  form  :  his  form  it  certainly 
is  ;'  and  this,  indeed,  is  as  Ssiudilya.  has  said  :  when 
it  (the  altar)  is  completely  built,  Agni  is  led  forward  ; 
and  after  he  has  been  led  forward,  logs  of  wood  '* 
are  offered  as  'oblations.' 

12.  By  means  of  (the  channel  of)  the  out-  (and  in-) 
breathing  the  gods  eat  food,  and  Agni  (the  sacri- 
ficial fire)  is  the  out-breathing  of  the  gods  ;  whence 
it  is  in  front  (of  the  sacrificial  ground)  that  offering 
is  made  to  the  gods,  for  by  means  of  the  (channel  of 
the)  out-breathing  the  gods  eat  food.  By  means 
of  the  down-breathing  men  eat  food,  whence   food 


'  Apparently  an  allusion  to  Hirawyagarbha,  the  golden  germ,  or 
the  golden  egg  (XI,  i,  6,  i),  from  which  the  Purusha,  creator  of 
the  universe,  arose.  Cf.  also  Aitareyar.  II,  i,  3,  with  Sayawa's 
commentary. 

"^  Sayawa  assigns  to  'hira;/maya'  the  meaning  'of  a  colour 
resembling  gold'  (hira;/yasamanavar;/a/i). 

3    See  IX,  2,  3,  36  seq. 


296  DATAPATH  A-BRAHMAiVA. 


is  introduced  into  men  (from  the  front)  towards  the 
back,  for  by  their  down-breathing  men  eat  food. 

13.  Here,  now,  they  say,  'He  who  has  built  an 
akar  must  not  eat  of  any  bird,  for  he  who  builds 
a  fire-altar  becomes  of  a  bird's  form  ;  he  would 
be  apt  to  incur  sickness:  the  Agni/^it  therefore 
must  not  eat  of  any  bird.'  Nevertheless,  one  who 
knows  this  may  safely  eat  thereof;  for  he  who 
builds  an  altar  becomes  of  Agni's  form,  and,  indeed, 
all  food  here  belongs  to  Agni :  whosoever  knows 
this  will  know  that  all  food  belongs  to  him. 

14.  Here,  now,  they  say,  'What  is  done  here 
in  (the  building  of)  the  altar,  whereby  the  Sacrificer 
conquers  recurring  death  ?  '  Well,  he  who  builds  an 
altar  becomes  the  deity  Agni ;  and  Agni  (the  fire), 
indeed,  is  the  immortal  (element) ; — the  gods  are 
splendour :  he  enters  splendour ;  the  gods  are 
glory  :  he  becomes  glorious  whosoever  knows  this. 

Fifth  BRAHMAiVA. 

I.  This  built  fire-altar,  in  truth,  (includes)  all  these 
sacrifices: — when  he  slaughters  an  animal  victim, 
that  is  the  Agnyadheya  (establishment  of  the  sacred 
fires)  ^  ;  when  he  collects  (the  materials  for)  the 
fire-pan,  that  constitutes  the  oblations  of  the 
Agnyadheya  ;    when     he     performs     the    initiation, 


'  Though  no  animal  sacrifice  takes  place  at  the  Agnyadhana, 
the  latter,  as  the  fundamental  ceremony  pre-supposed  by  all  subse- 
quent sacrificial  performances,  is  here  compared  with  the  immo- 
lation of  five  victims  (VI,  2,  i,  15  seq.)  which,  taking  place  as  it 
does  on  the  Upasavatha,  or  day  of  preparation,  i.e.  the  day  before 
the  Soma-sacrifice  on  the  newly  built  fire-altar,  is,  as  it  were, 
a  preliminary  ceremony. 


X  KANDA,    I  ADHYAYA,  5  BRAHMAiVA,  2.    297 


that  is  the  Agnihotra  ;  and  when  the  niitiated  puts 
two  logs  on  (the  fire)',  these  are  the  two  oblations 
of  the  Aonihotra. 

2.  He  puts  them  on  in  the  evening  and  in  the 
morning,  for  in  the  evening  and  in  the  morning 
the  Agnihotra  oblations  are  offered ; — with  one 
and  the  same  formula,  for  with  one  and  the  same 
formula  the  two  Agnihotra  oblations  are  offered  ^. 
Then  the  driving  about  (of  the  fire  in  the  pan  ^), 
and  the  taking  down  (to  the  w^ater)  of  the  ashes, 
these  two  (constitute)  the  New  and  Full-moon 
offerings ;  and  when  he  builds  the  Garhapatya 
hearth  ^  that  is  the  Aaturmasya  (seasonal  offerings); 
and  what  takes  place  from  (the  building  of)  the 
Garhapatya  up  to  the  (sowing  of)  all-herb  (seed  % 
that  constitutes)  the  ish/is  ^  and  what  takes  place 
after  the  all-herb  (sowing)  and  prior  to  (the  building 


^  This  refers  to  the  two  samidhs  (kindlmg-sticks)  put  on  the 
Ukhya  Agni, — one  in  the  evening,  and  one  in  the  morning, — afier 
the  ashes  had  been  cleared  out  of  the  fire-pan  (ukha) ;  see  VI, 
6,  4,  I  seq. 

^  Both  in  the  evening  and  in  the  morning  two  hbations  of  milk 
are  offered  (the  purvahuti  and  the  utlarahuti),  but  only  the  first  is 
oflfered  wiih  a  formula,  the  evening  formula  being,  'Agni  is  the 
light,  the  light  is  Agni,  hail ! '  whilst  the  morning  formula  is,  'Surya 
is  the  light,  the  light  is  Surya,  hail!'  See  II,  3,  i,  30.  For 
alternative  formulas— '  With  the  divine  Saviir/,  with  the  Night 
(or  Dawn,  respectively)  wedded  to  Indra,  may  Agni  (or  Indra, 
respectively)  graciously  accept,  hail  I '  see  II,  3,  i,  37.  38. 

•'•  See  VI,  8,  I,  I  seq.  Sayawa  takes  it  to  refer  to  the  Agni- 
prawayana,  or  leading  forward  of  the  fire  to  the  fire-altar;  but  that 
would  not  fit  in  well  with  the  ceremony  next  referred  to,  viz.  the 
removal  of  the  ashes  of  the  Ukhyagni,  or  fire  in  the  pan ;  for  which 
see  VI,  8,  2,  I  seq. 

*  VII,  I,  I,  I  seq. 

^  Viz.  on  the  newly  ploughed  aliar-site,  see  VII,  2,  4,  13  seq. 

•^  That  is,  offerings  for  the  fulfilment  of  some  special  wishes. 


298  5'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAA^\. 


of)  the  layers,  that  is  the  animal  sacrifices  ^  ;  and 
the  Vish;^u-strides  -  which  are  (performed)  at  these 
sacrifices  are  just  these  Vish;^u-strides  ;  and  what 
muttering  of  formulas  there  is  that  is  the  Vatsapra^ 
3.  The  first  layer  is  the  Soma-sacrifice  ;  the 
second  the  Ra^asiiya  as  prior  to  the  consecrations  * ; 
the  third  the  Va^apeya  ;  the  fourth  the  A^vamedha 
(horse-sacrifice)  ;  and  the  fifth  the  Agnisava  ■'.  Then 
the  samans  he  sings  around  the  built  (altar)  are 
the  Mahavrata(-saman)  ;  the  Udgatr/'s  preliminary 
muttering  (of  the  text  of  his  chants)  on  that  occasion 
is  the  ^atarudriya ;  the  '  shower  of  wealth '  the 
Great  Litany ;  and  what  takes  place  subsequent 
to  (the  singing  of)  the  samans,  and  prior  to  the 
shower  of  wealth,  that  is  the  Hotr/'s  preliminary 
muttering  on  that  occasion;  and  what  takes  place 
after  the  shower  of  wealth  is  the  Gr/hamedhas  ^ 
(house-sacrifices).  Such  are  all  the  sacrifices  :  these 
he  secures  by  (building)  the  fire-altar. 


^  That  is,  animal  sacrifices  performed  independently  of  other 
ceremonies. 

^  See  VI,  7,  2,  12  seq. 

3  See  VI,  7,  4,  I  seq. 

*  That  is,  the  ceremonies  connected  with  the  Va^aprasaviya 
oblations,  V,  2,  2,  4  seq.;  and  the  devasu-haviwshi,  or  oblations  to 
the  Divine  Quickeners  (by  whom  the  king  is  supposed  to  be  first 
consecrated),  V,  3,  3,  i  seq. 

^  See  IX,  3,  4,  7.  9.  It  is  strange  that  the  Agnisava  should  be 
mentioned  here,  as  it  is  said  to  be  confined  to  the  AgniX-ayana.  It 
would  seem  that  some  independent  ceremony,  such  as  the  Br/has- 
patisava  (consecration  of  Bn'haspati,  cf.  V,  2,  i,  19;  and  part  iii, 
introd.  p.  xxiv  seq.),  may  be  referred  to. 

^  Saya«a  identifies  these  with  the  offerings  of  sacrificial  sessions 
(sattra),  during  which  the  Sacrificer  is  indeed  called  the  Gr/hapati, 
or  master  of  the  house;  see  IV,  6,  3,  5  seq.;  and  part  ii,  p.  97, 
note  I. 


X    KkNDA,    2    ADIIVAVA,    I     BRAHMAA^A.     I.  299 


4.  Now,  then,  as  to  the  powers  (conferred  by  the 
performance)  of  sacrifices.  Verily,  he  who  (regularly) 
performs  the  Agnihotra  eats  food  in  the  evening  and 
in  the  morning  (when  he  comes  to  be)  In  yonder 
world,  for  so  much  sustenance  is  there  in  that 
sacrifice.  And  he  who  performs  the  New  and 
Full-moon  sacrifice  (eats  food)  every  half-month  ; 
and  he  who  performs  the  Seasonal  sacrifice  (does 
so)  every  four  months;  and  he  who  performs  the 
animal  sacrifice  (twice  a  year,  eats  food)  every  six 
months  ;  and  the  Soma-sacrificer  once  a  year ;  and 
the  builder  of  the  fire-altar  at  his  pleasure  eats  food 
every  hundred  years,  or  abstains  therefrom  ^ ;  for 
a  hundred  years  is  as  much  as  immortality  -,  unend- 
ing and  everlasting  :  and,  verily,  for  him  who  knows 
this,  there  shall  thus  be  immortality,  unending  and 
everlasting;  and  whatever  he  as  much  as  touches, 
as  it  were,  with  a  reed,  shall  be  for  him  immortal, 
unending  and  everlasting. 

Second  Adhyaya.     First  Braiimaata. 

I.  Pra^apati  was  desirous  of  going  up  to  the 
world  of  heaven  ;  but  Pra^'apati,  indeed,  is  all  the 
(sacrificial)    animals  ^ — man,    horse,    bull,    ram,   and 


*  That  is  to  say,  the  food  eaten  the  first  lime  will  sustain  him  for 
a  hundred  years,  after  which  time  he  may,  or  may  not,  take  food, 
being  sure  of  everlasting  life  and  a  godlike  nature. 

^  Or,  perhaps,  for  so  long  lasts  the  Amr/ta  (the  food  of  the 
immortals); — agni;;/  X'itavan  purushas  tu  j'alasa/wkhyakeshu  sa///- 
vatsareshu  teshu  kamam  aparimitam  a^-nati  yato  yavanta//  saiam 
sawvatsaras  lavad  am;7tam  devatvaprapakam  anantam  aparimitam 
anucim  bliavati.     Say. 

^  See  VI,  2,  r,  15  seq. 


^OO  i'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

he-goat : — by  means  of  these  forms  he  could  not 
do  so.  He  saw  this  bird-hke  body,  the  hre-akar, 
and  constructed  it.  He  attempted  to  fly  up,  with- 
out contracting  and  expanding  (the  wings),  but  could 
not  do  so.  By  contracting  and  expanding  (the 
wings)  he  did  fly  up :  whence  even  to  this  day  birds 
can  only  fly  up  when  they  contract  their  wings  and 
spread  their  feathers. 

2.  He  measures  it  (the  fire-altar)  by  finger- 
breadths  ;  for  the  sacrifice  being  a  man  \  it  is  by 
means  of  him  that  everything  is  measured  here. 
Now  these,  to  wit,  the  fingers,  are  his  lowest 
measure :  he  thus  secures  for  him  (the  sacrificial 
man  -)  that  lowest  measure  of  his,  and  therewith 
he  thus  measures  him. 

3.  He  measures  by  twenty- four  finger-breadths  ^, — 
the  Gayatr/  (verse)  consists  of  twenty-four  syllables, 
and  Agni  is  of  Gayatra  nature  ^  :  as  great  as  Agni 
is,  as  great  as  is  his  measure,  by  so  much  he  thus 
measures  him. 

4.  He  contracts  ^  (the  right  wing)  inside  on  both 


^  The  sacrifice,  being  the  substitute  of  (the  sacrificing) 
man,  is  represented  as  identical  with  the  Sacrificer,  its  measure- 
ments being  talcen  from  his  body  and  stature;  see  part  i,  p.  78, 
note  I. 

^  Or, — for  it,  viz.  the  fire-altar,  representing  both  Agni-Pra^a- 
pati  and  the  Sacrificer :  hence  this  assumed  identity  has  to  be 
borne  in  mind  to  understand  the  symbolic  speculations  of  the 
Brahmawa. 

^  This  measure  (24  aiiguli)  is  equal  to  one  '  aratni '  or  cubit; 
1 2  anguli  being  equal  to  a  '  vitasti '  or  span  (of  thumb  and  little 
finger,  or  from  wrist  to  tip  of  middle  finger). 

*  See  VI,  I,  I,  15;   I,  3,  19. 

•'  Or,  he  draws  in,  draws  together  (upasamuhati). 


X    KAA^DA.     2    ADHYAYA,     I     BRAHMAA'A,     5.  3OI 

sides  ^  by  just  four  finger-breadths,  and  expands  -  it 
outside  on  both  sides  ^  by  four  finger-breadths  :  he 
thus  expands  it  by  just  as  much  as  he  contracts  it ; 
and  thus,  indeed,  he  neither  exceeds  (its  proper 
size)  nor  does  he  make  it  too  small.  In  the  same 
way  in  regard  to  the  tail,  and  in  the  same  way  in 
regard  to  the  left  wing. 

5.    He    then    makes    two    bending-limbs  ^'   in    the 
wings,  for  there  are  two  bending-limbs  in  a  bird's 


^  That  is,  on  both  sides  of  tliat  part  of  the  wing  which  joins  the 
body  of  the  altar  he  draws  in  by  four  finger-breadths  the  two  long 
sides  of  the  wing,  thus  changing  the  parallelogram  into  a  trapezium, 
widiout  altering  the  superficial  area  of  the  wing.  On  the  plan  of 
the  altar  given  in  part  ii,  p.  419,  the  effect  of  this  manipulation  on 
the  wings  and  tail  is  indicated  by  pointed  lines.— Sayawa  remarks, 
— ubhayata/^  pakshasya  parjvadvaye,  antarata/^  X>it}-agner  madhyadej-e 
/(•aturahgulam  upasamuhati  sa;«kar!-hali  pravejayatity  artha// ; 
bahyata/^  agnimadhyad  bahyade^e  /-aturahgulaw  vyuduhati,  ante 
vivardhayati. 

-  Or,  he  draws  out,  or  draws  asunder  (vyuduhati). 

^  Literally  '  outbendings  '  (nir?zama)— '  Schwunggelenke '  (spring- 
limbs),  St.  Petersb.  Diet.— This  'bending-limb'  would  seem  to 
include  the  two  inner  segments  of  the  (solid  part  of  the)  wing — 
those  corresponding  to  the  upper  and  fore-arm  of  man — as  well  as 
the  adjoining  and  connecting  joints  or  articulations,  which  portions 
may  be  taken  roughly  as  forming  the  inner  third  of  the  wing  when 
covered  with  feathers.  The  '  bending-limb '  would  thus  derive  its 
name  from  its  '  bending,'  or  drawing,  the  wing  '  out '  from  the  body. 
Saya«a,  however,  explains  it  by  '  nitaravz  namati,'  'that  which 
bends  down,'  as  if  it  were  formed  from  the  prep,  'ni'  instead 
of  '  nis.'  The  manipulation  to  which  this  part  of  the  wing  is  to  be 
subjected  is,  however,  not  quite  easy  to  understand  from  the 
description,  and  the  commentary  affords  very  little  assistance — 
vilrAiya  iti  pakshabhagara  tredha  vibha^^ya  antare  tr/tiyabhage 
nirnamakara«am  .  . ;  eta/w  .yrutim  apekshyaivapastambenoktam, 
'vakrapaksho  vyastapu/('X-/iO  bhavati,  pa.c/('at  prah  (!)  uduhati,  pura- 
stat  jiratyudijhati,  evam  eva  hi  vayasam  madhye  pakshanirwamo 
bhavatiti  vi^/7ayate'  iti. 


302  ^-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 


wings.  In  one-third  (of  each  wing  he  makes  them), 
for  the  bending-hmbs  are  in  one-third  of  the  bird's 
wings;— in  the  inner  thirds  for  the  bending-Hmbs 
are  in  the  inner  third  of  a  bird's  wines.  He 
expands  (each  of  these  Hmbs)  in  front  ^  by  just 
four  finger-breadths,  and  contracts  it  behind  by 
four  finger-breadths ;  he  thus  expands  it  by  just 
as  much  as  he  contracts  it ;  and  thus,  indeed,  he 
neither  exceeds  (its  size),  nor  does  he  make  it 
too  small. 

6.  On  that  bending-limb  he  places  one  brick  :  he 
thereby  gives  to  it  that  single  tube  (tubular  organ) 
which  joins  on  to  ^'  (the  body)  from  the  bending- 
limb  of  the  flying  bird.     Then  here  (on  the  left  wing). 

7.  He  then  makes  the  wnngs  crooked,  for  a  bird's 
wings  are  crooked  ;  he  expands  them  behind  by  just 
four  finger-breadths,  and  contracts  them  in  front  by 
four  finger-breadths  * :  he  thus  draws  them  out  by 

'  That  is,  the  third  part  of  the  wing  adjoining  the  body. 

^  That  is,  at  the  front  edge  of  the  wing  of  the  flying  bird,  that 
which  cuts  through  the  air.  The  joint  between  the  second  and 
third  segments  of  the  wing,  Avhen  expanded,  would  protrude,  whilst 
on  the  opposite  side  of  the  wing  the  tops  of  the  feathers  would 
somewhat  recede ;  but  I  am  not  sure  whether  this  is  what  is 
referred  to  in  these  indications. 

^  Literally,  which  lies  beside,  or  close  to  (upajete,  viz.  the  body, 
as  it  would  seem)  from  the  bending-limb.  The  brick  is  apparently 
meant  to  represent  symbolically  the  bone  of  the  upper  segment,  or 
some  tubular  organ  by  which  the  vital  air  is  supposed  to  enter  the 
wing  from  the  body.  Saya;/a  remarks, — pakbhipakshamadhyaga- 
tana^itvena  pra^-a^/sati,  .  .  ^ityagne-^  pakshamadhye  eka?«  nadim 
eva  nihitavan  bhavati. 

*  Comm.— ^aturahgulamatra;;z  paj-Mdbhage  uduhati  vikarshati, 
purastadbhage  /(:aturahgulamatra;;/  samuhati  sa7/'^karshati ;  eva/;/ 
knit  vakratva/«  bhavati.  Cf.  Apastamba's  directions  in  note  3  of 
last  page.  I  fail  to  see,  however,  in  what  respect  this  manipulation 
differs  from  that  referred  to  in  paragraph  5 ;    and  whether  the 


X    KANDA,    2    ADHYAYA,    I     BRAHMAiVA,     II.  303 

just  as  much  as  he  draws  them  in  ;  and  thus,  indeed, 
he  neither  exceeds  (its  size)  nor  does  he  make  it  too 
small. 

8.  He  now  gives  to  it  (the  altar)  the  highest  form '. 
This  Agni  had  now  been  completely  restored,  and 
the  gods  conferred  upon  him  this  highest  form ; 
and  in  like  manner  does  this  (Sacrificer)  confer 
upon  him  this  highest  form  :  he  makes  a  thousand 
bricks  marked  with  straight  lines,  a  thousand  marked 
this  way  (from  left  to  right),  and  a  thousand  marked 
that  way  (from  right  to  left). 

9.  And  when  he  has  laid  down  the  fifth  layer,  he 
measures  out  the  altar  in  three  parts,  and  on  the 
central  part  he  places  the  one  thousand  bricks 
marked  with  straight  lines  :  he  thereby  gives  to  it 
those  straight  plumes  of  the  bird  pointing  back- 
wards (with  their  tops,  and  covering  it)  from  head 
to  tail. 

10.  On  the  right  side  he  then  lays  down  the  one 
thousand  (bricks)  marked  //lus  (from  left  to  right)  : 
he  thereby  gives  to  it  those  curved  plumes  on  the 
right  side  of  the  bird  -. 

11.  On  the  left  side  he  then  lays  down  the  one 
thousand  (bricks)  marked  ///?is  (from  right  to  left)  : 
he  thereby  gives  to  it  those  curved  plumes  on  the 
left  side  of  the  bird.  With  a  thousand  (bricks  he 
does  it  each  time) — a  thousand  means  everything  : 


'  vakratvam  '  refers  to  the  irregular  shape,  or  to  the  curved  nature, 
of  the  wings. 

^  That  is,  he  gives  to  it  the  last  finish. 

'^  Or,  perhaps,  those  soft  feathers  of  the  bird  curved  towards  the 
right.  Saya;/a  as  above  —  dakshiwata//  dakshi;/apakshe  ityalikhita 
dakslii«av/-7'ta  ish/aka/? ;  uttarata//  uttarasmin  pakshe  ityalikhild// 
savyavr/ta  isli/aka  upadadh)  at. 


;^04  iS-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAA^A. 

with  everything  (required)  he  thus  confers  that 
highest  form  upon  him  (Agni); — with  three  thousand 
— Agni  is  threefold  :  as  great  as  Agni  is,  as  great  as 
is  his  measure,  with  so  much  he  thus  confers  the 
highest  form  upon  him. 

Second  Brahmaa^a. 

1.  Now  the  one  person  which  they  made  out 
of  those  seven  persons  ^  became  this  Pra^apati. 
He  produced  living  beings  (or  offspring),  and  having 
produced  living  beings  he  went  upwards, — he  went 
to  that  world  where  that  (sun)  now  shines.  And, 
indeed,  there  was  then  no  other  (victim)  meet  for 
sacrifice  but  that  one  (Pra^^apati),  and  the  gods  set 
about  offering  him  up  in  sacrifice. 

2.  Wherefore  it  is  with  reference  to  this  that  the 
i?/shi  has  said  (Va^-.  S.  XXXI,  i6,  7?/g-veda  X, 
90,  16),  *  The  gods  offered  up  sacrifice  by 
sacrifice,' — for  by  sacrifice  they  did  offer  up  him 
(Pra^apati),  the  sacrifice  ; — '  these  were  the  first 
ordinances  :' — for  these  laws  were  instituted  first ; — 
'  these  powers  clung  unto  the  firmament/ — the 
firmament  is  the  world  of  heaven,  and  the  powers 
are  the  gods  :  thus,  '  Those  gods  who  offered  up 
that  sacrifice  shall  cling  to  the  world  of  heaven  ; ' — 

3.  '  Where  first  the  perfect  gods  were,'— the 
perfect  ^  gods,  doubtless,  are  the  vital  airs,  for  it  is 
they  that  perfected  him  in  the  beginning^  when  they 

^  Literally,  those  seven  persons  which  they  made  into  one  person. 
See  VI,  1,1,1  seq. 

^  It  is  difficult  to  see  what  meaning  the  author  assigns  to 
'  sadhya '  applied  to  minor  classes  of  deities. 

^  See  VI,  I,  I,  I. 


X  KANDA,    2    ADHVAVA,  2  BRAHMAA'A.  6.    305 

were  desirous  of  becoming  that  (body  of  Pra^a- 
pati  ^) ;  and  even  now,  indeed,  they  do  perfect 
(him). — [y??g-veda  X,  149,  3] — 'Thereafter  this 
other  became  meet  for  sacrifice  by  the  abun- 
dance of  the  immortal  world/ — for  thereafter, 
indeed,  other  things  here — whatsoever  is  immortal — 
became  fit  for  sacrifice. 

4.  'Savitrz's  well-winged  eagle  verily  was 
first  born,  and  he  was  according  to  his 
ordinance,' — the  well-winged  eagle,  doubtless,  is 
Pra^apati,  and  Savitr?  is  that  (sun)  :  thus,  '  In 
accordance  with  his  (the  sun's)  law  he  indeed 
(comported  himself).' 

5.  He  indeed  consists  of  seven  persons,  for  that 
Person  ^  consisted  of  seven  persons  ; — to  wit,  the 
body  of  four,  and  the  wings  and  tail  of  three,  for  of 
four  the  body  of  that  Person  consisted,  and  of  three 
his  wings  and  tail. 

6.  He  measures  it  (the  altar)  by  the  man  with 
upstretched  arms  ^  ;  for  the  sacrifice  is  a  man,  and 
by  him  everything  here  is  measured ;  and  that  is 
his  highest  measure  when  he  stands  with  up- 
stretched  arms  :  he  thus  secures  for  him  what  is 
his  highest  measure,  and  therewith  he  then  measures 
it.  And  what  (space)  there  is  over  and  above  that 
when  he  is  raised  on  the  forepart  of  his  foot,  that 
he  secures  by  the  enclosing-stones  ;   and  hence  he 

^  Tad  eva  bubhushanta  iii,  pra«a^  svayam  api  i  n^apatyat- 
mana  (?  pr%apatyatmano)  bhavitum  iM/ianta^.     Sa}-. 

^  See  VI,  1,1,  3-6. 

^  That  is  to  say,  wherever  he  speaks  of  man's  lengths,  the  height 
to  which  a  man  reaches  with  liis  ups-trclched  arms  is  understood ; 
the  particular  man  who  supplies  this  (relative)  standard  of  measure 
being  the  Sacrificer. 

[43]  X 


306  5'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

should    dig  a  line   for  the   enclosing- stones  outside 
(the  altar-ground). 

7.  Two  cubits  he  gives  to  the  two  wings :  he 
thereby  lays  strength  into  the  wings.  And  the 
wings  are  (the  bird's)  arms,  and  by  means  of  the 
arms  food  is  eaten  :  it  is  thus  for  the  sake  of  food 
that  he  gives  them  that  space  ;  and  when  he  gives 
two  cubits  to  the  two  wings,  it  is  because  food  is 
taken  from  the  distance  of  a  cubit. 

8.  To  the  tail  he  gives  a  span :  he  thus  lays 
strength  into  the  support,  for  the  tail  is  the  support. 
The  span  means  the  hand  ^  and  by  means  of  the 
hand  food  is  eaten  :  it  is  thus  for  the  sake  of  food 
that  he  gives  it  that  space ;  and  when  he  gives 
a  span  to  the  tail,  he  thereby  settles  him  (Agni) 
in  (the  midst  of)  food ;  and  when  he  gives  less 
(space)  to  this  (part  of  the  body),  it  is  because  he 
thereby  settles  him  in  (the  midst  of)  food  ^.  But, 
indeed,  so  much  does  this  (the  bird's  wing)  measure, 
and  so  much  this  (the  bird's  tail),  and  hence  when 
he  thus  measures  them,  it  is  for  the  sake  of  securing 
for  him  that  (natural  measure). 

Third  BRAiiMAiVA. 

1.  Now  this  Vedi  (altar-ground,  viz.  the  Maha- 
vedi  of  the  Soma-sacrihce)  is  just  that  (right) 
measure  for  the  Vedi  of  the  sevenfold  ^  (fire-altar). 

^  The  span  of  thumb  and  little  finger  is  taken  to  be  equal  to 
the  distance  from  the  wrist  to  the  tip  of  the  middle  finger. 

-  That  is  to  say,  he  makes  him  so  as  to  occupy  but  small  space, 
and  to  be  surrounded  by  abundant  food. 

^  That  is,  measuring  seven  times  the  length  of  a  man  standing 
with  upstretched  arms. 


X    KANDA,     2    ADHYAVA,    3    BRAIIMAiVA,    2.  307 

Having  fixed  upon  (the  place  for)  the  sacrificial 
ground,  he  enters  the  Patni.Tala  ^  by  the  front  (east) 
door,  and  having  thrown  up  (the  ground)  for  the 
Garhapatya,  he  sprinkles  it  with  water.  From 
the  raised  (site)  of  the  Garhapat)a  he  strides 
seven  steps  eastward.  From  there  he  measures 
off  a  fathom  -  towards  the  east,  and  having,  in  the 
middle  thereof,  thrown  up  (the  ground)  for  the 
Ahavaniya,  he  sprinkles  it  with  water.  From 
the  front  part  of  the  fathom  he  strides  three  steps 
eastward  :   that  is  the  end  of  the  Vedi  -^ 

2.  Now,  there  are  here,  including  the  fathom  (as 
one),  eleven  steps  ''  between  the  end  of  the  Vedi  and 
the  (original)  Garhapatya  ; — the  Trish/ubh  consists 


^  That  is,  '  the  wife's  hall,' — the  sacrificial  hall  or  shed,  usually 
called  PriU'inavawj-a  or  Pragvawja,  measuring  20  cubits  by  10 
(part  ii,  p.  3,  note  2),  in  w  hich  the  original  fires  and  vedi  of  ish/is  are 
enclosed  at  the  Soma-sacrifice ;  see  the  plan,  part  ii,  p.  475. 

^  A  fiilhom  (vyama)  is  the  space  between  the  tips  of  the  two 
middle  fingers  of  a  man  standing  widi  outstretched  arms,  this  being 
considered  the  man's  height.  In  this  paragraph,  the  author  roughly 
recapitulates  the  main  dimensions  of  the  sacrificial  ground  used  for 
ish/is,  which  will  also  be  required  for  the  present  purpose.  The 
dimensions  here  supjilicd  will  give  about  the  distance  of  eight  steps 
between  (the  centres  of)  the  Garhapatya  and  Ahavaniya  fires  required 
by  I,  7,  3,  23.  In  the  middle  of  the  space  of  a  fathom  here  alluded 
to  as  the  easternmost  space  of  the  hall,  the  (original  square) 
Ahavaniya  is  laid  down,  Ixit  this  ultimately  makes  way  for  the  new 
circular  Garhapatya  hearth  built  of  bricks  and  having  the  whole  of 
this  '  fiithom  '  for  its  diameter. 

^  That  is,  the  hindmost  (western)  point  of  the  (easterly  line  of 
the)  Mahavedi  of  the  Soma-sacrifice,  where  the  peg,  called  '  anta/z- 
palya,'  is  driven  in,  being  three  steps  east  from  the  post  of  the 
front  door  of  the  PraX'inavaw/ja  (and  hence  three  stejjs  from  the 
future  circular  Garhapatya  hearth  built  of  bricks). 

*  Literally,  these  are  (ten)  steps,  having  the  fathom  as  an  eleventh 
(space  or  step). 

X    2 


3o8  5'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 


of  eleven  syllables,  and  the  Trish/ubh  is  a  thunder- 
bolt, and  the  Trish/ubh  means  strength  :  it  is  thus 
by  the  thunderbolt,  and  by  strength,  that  the 
Sacrificer  from  the  very  first  drives  off  the  fiends, 
the  Rakshas,  from  the  mouth  of  the  sacrifice. 

3.  This  is  the  womb  of  the  Vedi,  for  it  was  from 
that  womb  that  the  gods  begat  the  Vedi.  And 
that  (space  of  a)  fathom  which  was  (marked  off), 
is  the  womb  of  the  Garhapatya  \  for  it  was  from 
that  womb  that  the  gods  begat  the  Garhapatya;  and 
from  the  Garhapatya  the  Ahavaniya. 

4.  From  the  (western)  end  of  the  Vedi  he  measures 
oft^  the  Vedi  -  thirty-six  steps  long  eastward,  thirty 
(steps)  broad  behind,  and  twenty-four  (steps  broad) 
in  front, — that  makes  ninety.  This,  then,  is  the 
Vedi  measuring  ninety  steps  :  thereon  he  lays  out 
the  sevenfold  Fire-altar. 

5.  As  to  this  they  say,  '  How  does  this  sevenfold 
(Person,  the  fire-altar,)  correspond  to  this  Vedi 
(measuring  ninety  steps)  ? '     Well,  there   are   these 

^  That  is,  the  brick-built  Garhapatya  of  the  Agni/('ayana  on 
which  the  Ukhya  Agni,  having  been  carried  about  by  the  Sacrificer 
for  a  year,  is  transferred  from  the  fire-pan  (ukha),  and  from  which 
aflerwards  the  fire  of  the  great  altar  is  derived.  This  new  Garha- 
patya has  been  raised  on  the  site  of  the  old  (square)  Ahavaniya 
(the  so-called  '  jaladvarya '  or  hall-door  fire),  on  which  the  fire  in 
the  pan,  the  Ukhya  Agni,  was  kindled  (esha  ahavaniyo  vakshya- 
mankyas  /Oayanamahaveder  garhapatyo  bhavati ;  Say.).  The  pan 
containing  this  fire  was  then  placed  half  a  fathom  south  of  (the 
centre  of)  the  old  Ahavaniya,  and  hence  so  as  to  stand  quite  close 
to  the  brick-built  Garhapatya  raised  in  its  place,  and  forming 
a  circle  with  a  diameter  of  one  fathom.  Thus  this  '  space  of  a 
fathom  '  is  here  quite  correctly  referred  to  as  the  original  source 
of  the  fires  of  the  AgniX'ayana. 

-  For  the  dimensions  of  the  Mahavedi  here  referred  to,  see 
part  ii,  p.  1 1 1  seq. 


X    KANDA,    2    ADIIYAYA,    3    BRAILMAA'A,    J.         309 


ten  vital  airs  in  a  man  \  four  limbs,  and  the  trunk 
as  the  fifteenth  ;  in  the  same  way  in  the  second, 
and  in  the  same  way  in  the  third  (man), — in  six 
men  this  makes  ninety ;  and  one  man  remains  over. 
Now,  (that  seventh)  man  is  fivefold — hair,  skin,  llesh, 
bone,  and  marrow  (fat),  and  this  Vedi  also  is  five- 
fold—the four  regions  (quarters),  and  the  body  (of 
the  altar)  as  the  fifth  ^ :  thus  this  sevenfold  (altar) 
does  indeed  correspond  to  this  Vedi. 

6.  Now,  some,  intending  to  construct  higher  forms 
(of  altars),  increase  (the  number  of)  these  steps  and 
this  fathom  accordingly,  saying,  'We  enlarge  the 
womb  in  accordance  therewith  ; ' — but  let  him  not  do 
so ;  for  the  womb  does  not  enlarge  along  with  the 
child  that  has  been  born  ^  but,  indeed,  only  as  long 
as  the  child  is  within  the  womb,  does  the  womb 
enlarge,  and  so  long,  indeed,  the  growth  of  the 
(unborn)  child  here  (lasts)  *. 

7.  Indeed,  those  who  do  it  in  that  way,  deprive 
this  Father  Pra^^apati  of  his  due  proportions;  and 
they  will  become  the  worse  for  sacrificing,  for  they 
deprive   Father  Pra^apati   of  his   due  proportions. 


'  That  is,  in  the  first  of  these  seven  persons  or  men,  making  up 
the  sacrificial  man  (ya^/7a-purusha),  Pra^apati ;  that  first  man 
being  the  Sacrificer  himself,  as  supplying  the  standard  for  these 
measures. 

2  That  is,  the  fifth  region,  situated  in  a  vertical  direction,  this 
being  represented  by  the  fire-altar  which  rises  upwards. 

3  Somewhat  dilTerenlly  Professor  Delbruck,  Altind.  Syntax, 
p.  444,  'The  womb  does  not  grow  in  proportion  with  the  embryo 
produced  therein.' 

"  The  argument  of  the  author  apparently  is,  that  the  planned 
enlargement  of  the  fire-altar  is  an  enlargement  of  the  child  Agni, 
after  he  has  been  born,  and  does  not  involve  an  increased  size  of 
the  original  sacrificial  ground  of  die  PraXinavaw^a. 


3IO  5'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 


As  large  as  this  Vedl  ^  of  the  sevenfold  (fire-altar) 
is,  fourteen  times  as  large  he  measures  out  the 
Vedi  of  the  one  hundred  and  one-fold  (altar). 

8.  He  now  measures  off  a  cord  thirty-six  steps- 
(yards)  long,  and  folds  it  up  into  seven  (equal)  parts  : 
of  this  he  covers  (the  space  of)  the  three  front 
(eastern)  parts  (with  bricks),  and  leaves  four  (parts)  ^ 

free. 

9.  He  then  measures  (a  cord)  thirty  steps  long, 
and  lays  it  sevenfold  :  of  this  he  covers  three  parts 
(with  bricks)  behind,  and  leaves  four  (parts)  free  *. 


1  That  is,  of  course,  the  Mahavedi  on  which  the  (ordinary)  fire- 
altar  is  raised,  and  which  is  enlarged  in  proportion  to  the  size  of 
the  altar.  The  intermediate  sizes  of  the  fire-altar  between  the  two 
extremes  here  alluded  to  increase  each  by  four  square  'man's 
lengths'  (the  man  being  measured  with  upstretched  arms),  or  by 
one  man's  length  on  each  side  of  the  body  of  the  altar ;  the  largest 
possible  altar  thus  measuring  loi  man's  lengths  on  each  side. 

2  A  step,  or  pace  (prakrama)  is  equal  to  3  feet  (pada),  a  foot 
measuring  12  finger-breadths  (ahgula),— these  measures  being; 
however  (at  least  theoretically),  relative  to  the  Sacrificer's  height. 

•'  That  is  to  say,  he  stretches  the  cord  along  the  ground  from 
the  (western)  '  end  of  the  Vedi '  eastwards,  and  marks  off  on  the 
trround  three-sevenths  of  the  cord  on  the  eastern  side,  that  part  of 
the  Vedi  being  afterwards  covered  by  the  brick-built  altar,  whilst 
the  remaining  space  behind  is  required  for  the  Sadas  and  Havir- 
dhana  sheds,  &c.  If  we  take  the  Mahavedi  to  be  108  feet  long 
(=36  prakramas)  this  would  allow  i5§  feet  for  each  part,  or  some 
46  feet  for  the  length  of  the  part  to  be  covered  with  bricks,  and  this 
measure,  being  equal  to  seven  man's  lengths,  would  allow  6|  feet  for 
a  man's  length  (including  the  upstretched  arms).  Between  the 
altar  and  the  front  (eastern)  edge  of  the  Vedi  a  space  of  one  foot 
is,  however,  to  be  left. 

*  That  is,  he  stretches  the  cord  across  (north  to  south)  and 
marks  off  the  three  central  divisions  of  it  as  forming  the  hind  side 
of  the  altar  (leaving  two-sevenths  of  the  string  free  on  either  side). 
This  gives  laf  (out  of  90)  feet  for  each  part,  or  384  feet  for  the 
back,  or  western,  side  of  the  altar. 


X    KANDA,    2    ADHYAYA,    3    BRAITMAiVA,     1 5.  3II 


10.  He  then  measures  (a  cord)  twenty- four  steps 
long,  and  lays  it  sevenfold  :  of  this  he  covers  three 
parts  in  front  (with  bricks),  and  leaves  four  (parts) 
free'.     This,  then,  is  the  measuring  out  of  the  Vedi. 

11.  Now  as  to  the  (other)  forms  of  the  fire-altar. 
Twenty-eight  man's  lengths  long  (from  west  to  east) 
and  twenty-eight  man's  lengths  across  is  the  body 
(of  the  altar),  fourteen  man's  lengths  the  right,  and 
fourteen  the  left  wing,  and  fourteen  the  tail.  Four- 
teen cubits  (aratni)  he  covers  (with  bricks)  on  the 
right,  and  fourteen  on  the  left  wing,  and  fourteen 
spans  (vitasti)  on  the  tail.  Such  is  the  measure 
of  (an  altar  of)  ninety-eight  man's  lengths  with  the 
additional  space  (for  wings  and  tail). 

12.  He  now  measures  a  cord  of  three  man's 
lengths,  and  lays  it  sevenfold  :  of  this  he  covers  (the 
space  of)  four  parts  (with  bricks)  on  the  body  (of 
the  altar),  and  three  parts  on  the  wings  and  tail. 

13.  He  then  measures  one  three  cubits  long,  and 
lays  it  sevenfold  :  of  this  he  covers  (the  space  of) 
three  parts  on  the  right,  and  three  on  the  left  wing, 
and  leaves  four  (parts)  free. 

14.  He  then  measures  one  a  span  long,  and  lays 
it  sevenfold  :  of  this  he  covers  (the  space  of)  three 
parts  on  the  tail,  and  leaves  four  (parts)  free.  In 
this  way  does  this  one  hundred  and  one-fold  (Agni) 
correspond  to  this  Vedi. 

15.  As  to  this  they  say,  'When  thirteen  man's 
lengths  are  over,  how  is  it  that  these  do  not  deviate 


'  This  gives  lof  (out  of  72)  feet  for  each  part,  or  30:  feet  for 
the  front,  or  eastern,  side  of  the  altar.  The  measurements  here 
given  are  intended  as  a  refinement  on  the  usual  square  shape  of 
the  fire-altar. 


3  I  2  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

from  the  right  proportions  (of  the  altar)  ^?'  Well, 
what  right  proportions  there  were  in  the  case  of 
that  seventh  man's  length  '\  these  same  propor- 
tions (also  apply)  to  all  these  (redundant  man's 
lengths). 

16.  And  they  also  say,  'When  Pra^^apati  had 
formed  the  body  he  filled  it  up  with  these  (redundant 
lengths)  wherever  there  was  anything  defective  in 
it ;  and  therefore  also  it  is  rightly  proportioned. 

17.  As  to  this  some  say,  'The  first  time  they 
construct  a  simple  (altar  •^),  then  the  one  higher  by 
one  (man's  length),  up  to  the  one  of  unlimited  size.' 
Let  him  not  do  so. 

18.  Sevenfold,  indeed,  Pra^apati  was  created  in 
the  beginning.  He  went  on  constructing  (develop- 
ing) his  body,  and  stopped  at  the  one  hundred  and 
one-fold  one.  He  who  constructs  one  lower  than 
a  sevenfold  one  cuts  this  Father  Pra^apati  in  twain : 
he  will  be  the  worse  for  sacrificing  as  one  would  be 
by  doing  injury  tO'  his  better.  And  he  who  con- 
structs one  exceeding  the  one  hundred  and  one-fold 
one  steps  beyond  this  universe,  for  Pra^apati  is 
this  universe.  Hence  he  should  first  construct  the 
sevenfold  (altar),  then  the  next  higher  up  to  the 
one  hundred  and  one-fold  one,  but  he  should  not 
construct  one  exceeding  the  one  hundred  and  one- 


^  Or,  from  the  right  total  (sampad)  which  the  altar  ought  to 
obtain.  By  paragraph  7,  the  altar  is  to  be  made  fourteen  times  as 
large  as  the  sevenfold  one ;  and  the  latter  being  said  to  be  in  exact 
proportion  with  Pra^apati  (in  paragraph  3),  the  larger  altar  would 
thus  show  an  excess  of  thirteen  man's  lengths  over  the  rightly 
proportioned  altar. 

*  Viz.  in  paragraph  5. 

^  That  is,  one  of  a  single  man's  length  on  each  side. 


X    KANDA,    2    ADHYAVA,    4    BRAIIMAA^A,    3.  313 

fold  one,  and  thus,  indeed,  he  neither  cuts  this 
Father  Pra^apati  in  twain,  nor  does  he  step  beyond 
this  universe. 

Fourth  Braiimaa^a. 

1.  Pra^apati,  indeed,  is  the  year,  and  Agni  is 
all  objects  of  desire.  This  Pra^apati,  the  year, 
desired,  '  May  I  build  up  for  myself  a  body  so  as 
to  contain  ^  Agni,  all  objects  of  desire.'  He  con- 
structed a  body  one  hundred  and  one-fold  ;  and  in 
constructing  a  body  one  hundred  and  one-fold,  he 
built  up  for  himself  a  body  so  as  to  contain  Agni, 
all  objects  of  desire,  and  himself  became  all  objects 
of  desire  ;  there  was  not  one  object  of  desire  outside 
of  him  :  whence  they  say,  '  The  year  (includes)  all 
objects  of  desire ; '  for,  indeed,  outside  the  \ear 
there  is  no  object  of  desire  whatever. 

2.  And  in  like  manner  does  the  Sacrificer  now, 
by  constructing  a  body  (of  the  altar)  one  hundred 
and  one-fold,  build  for  himself  a  body  so  as  to 
contain  Agni,  all  objects  of  desire :  he  becomes  all 
objects  of  desire,  and  not  one  object  of  (his)  desire 
is  outside  of  him. 

3.  Now  this  )ear  is  the  same  as  yonder  sun  ;  and 
he  is  this  one  hundred  and  one-fold  (Agni); — his 
rays  are  a  hundredfold,  and  he  himself  who  shines 


'  Literally,  May  I  build  for  myself  a  body  (self)  with  a  view  10 
(abhi)  Agni ;  or,  perhaps,  '  He  builds  (a  body)  so  as  to  become 
(Agni);'  in  which  case  'abhi'  of '  abhisaw/('inute '  would  have  the 
same  force  as  in  '  abhisampadyate.'  See,  however,  X,  2,  5,  9-12. 
where  Sayaz/a  explains  it  by  'yo  ya/i  kama//  taw  sarvam  atmanam 
abhilakshyasampaditavanbhavaii' — 'He  brings  about  (accomplishes) 
all  that  debire  for  his  bod  v.' 


314  ^-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 


yonder,  being  the  one  hundred  and  first,  is  firmly 
estabhshed  in  this  universe ;  and  in  Hke  manner 
does  the  Sacrificer  now  estabHsh  himself  in  this 
universe  by  constructing  for  himself  a  body  a  hun- 
dred and  one-fold. 

4.  And,  Indeed,  the  one  hundred  and  one-fold 
passes  into  (becomes  equal  to)  the  sevenfold  one  ; 
for  yonder  sun,  whilst  composed  a  hundred  and 
one-fold,  is  established  in  the  seven  worlds  of  the 
gods,  for,  indeed,  there  are  seven  worlds  of  the 
gods, — the  four  quarters  and  these  three  worlds  : 
these  are  the  seven  worlds  of  the  gods,  and  in 
them  that  (sun)  is  established.  And  in  like  manner 
does  the  Sacrificer  now  establish  himself  in  the 
seven  worlds  of  the  gods  by  constructing  for  himself 
a  body  a  hundred  and  one-fold. 

5.  And,  again,  as  to  how  the  one  hundred  and 
one-fold  (altar)  passes  into  the  sevenfold  one  : — 
yonder  sun,  composed  of  a  hundred  and  one  parts, 
is  established  in  the  seven  seasons,  in  the  seven 
stomas  (hymn-forms), in  theseven  pr/sh///a  (-samans). 
in  the  seven  metres,  in  the  seven  vital  airs,  and  in 
the  seven  regions ;  and  in  like  manner  does  the 
Sacrificer  now  establish  himself  in  this  universe  (or, 
on  everything  here)  by  constructing  for  himself 
a  body  one  hundred  and  one-fold. 

6.  And,  again,  as  to  how  the  one  hundred  and 
one-fold  passes  into  the  sevenfold  one : — yonder 
sun,  composed  of  a  hundred  and  one  parts,  is  estab- 
lished in  the  seven-syllabled  Brahman,  for  the 
Brahman  (holy  writ  or  prayer)  indeed  consists  of 
seven  syllables, — '  7'/k  '  is  one  syllable,  '  ya^u// '  two, 
and  '  sama '  two  ;  and  what  other  Brahman  there 
is  that  is  just  the  '  brahman  '  of  two  syllables — this 


X    KANDA,    2    ADIIYAVA,    4    BRAHMAA'A,    8.  315 

seven-syllabled  Brahman  is  the  universe '  :  therein 
that  (sun)  is  established  ;  and  in  like  manner  does 
the  Sacrificer  now  establish  himself  in  the  seven- 
syllabled  Brahman  by  constructing  for  himself  a 
body  one  hundred  and  one-fold. 

7.  Therefore,  also,  the)'  lay  down  around  (the 
altar)  sets  of  seven  (bricks)  each  time,  and  hence  the 
one  hundred  and  one-fold  passes  into  the  sevenfold 
one ;  and,  indeed,  the  sevenfold  one  passes  into  the 
one  hundred  and  one-fold. 

8.  Sevenfold,  indeed,  Pra^apati  was  created  in 
the  beginning.  He  saw  this  body  composed  of 
a  hundred  and  one  parts — fifty  bricks  in  the  Pra//a- 
bhr/ts^,  and  fifty  sacrificial  formulas,  that  makes 
a  hundred,  and  the  '  settling '  and  sudadohas-formula 
are  the  two  one  hundred  and  first — these  two  are 
one  and  the  same,  for  when  he  has  '  settled  '  (a  brick), 
he  pronounces  the  sudadohas-formula  over  it :  by 
means  of  this  one  hundred  and  one-fold  body  he 
gained  that  conquest  and  obtained  that  success  ;  and 
in  like  manner  does  the  Sacrificer,  by  means  of  this 
one  hundred  and  one-fold  body,  gain  that  conquest 
and  obtain  that  success.  And  thus,  indeed,  the 
sevenfold  (altar)  passes  into  the  one  hundred  and 
one-fold  :  that  which  is  a  hundred  and  one-fold  is 
sevenfold,  and  that  which  is  sevenfold  is  a  hundred 
and  one-fold.     So  much  as  to  the  forms  (of  altars). 


'  Or,  perhaps,  '  all  this  (taken  together)  is  the  sevenfold 
Brahman.' 

^  In  the  first  layer  ten  Prawabh/vl  bricks  were  placed  along  the 
diagonals  in  each  of  the  four  corners  of  the  body  of  the  altar  (or  in 
the  intenncdiaie  quarters),  and  as  many  round  the  centre. 


->  1  6  ^-ATAPATHA-BRAHMATVA. 


Fifth  Brahmaaa. 

1.  Now  as  to  the  building  itself.  He  builds 
between  the  two  (performances  of  the)  Upasads^ 
For  at  that  time  the  gods  were  afraid  lest  the  fiends, 
the  Rakshas,  should  destroy  that  (Agni's  body)  of 
theirs  (built)  there-.  They  saw  these  strongholds, 
the  Upasads,  to  wit,  these  worlds,  for  these  worlds 
are  indeed  strongholds.  They  entered  them,  and 
having  entered  them,  they  completed  that  body 
in  a  place  free  from  danger  and  devilry ;  and  in 
like  manner  does  the  Sacrincer  now,  after  entering 
these  strongholds,  complete  this  body  in  a  place 
free  from  danger  and  devilry. 

2.  And,  again,  as  to  why  he  builds  between  the 
Upasads.  At  this  time  the  gods  were  afraid  lest 
the  fiends,  the  Rakshas,  should  destroy  that  (Agni's 
body)  of  theirs  (built)  there.  They  saw  these 
thunderbolts,  the  Upasads,  for  the  Upasads  indeed 
are  thunderbolts:  they  entered  them ^  and,  having 
entered  them,  they  completed  that  body  in  a  place 
free  from  danger  and  devilry;  and  in  like  manner 
does  the  Sacrificer  now,  after  entering  those  thunder- 


^  The  Upasads  (or  sieges)  are  performed  twice  a  day  on  at  least 
three  days  (the  regular  number  for  ordinary  one  day's  Soma-sacri- 
fices)  intervening  between  the  end  of  the  Diksha  (initiation)  and  the 
day  of  the  Soma-sacrifice  ;  see  part  ii,  p.  105,  note  i.  On  the  first 
day  the  first  layer  is  built  between  the  two  performances  (whilst  the 
final  preparation  of  the  altar-site,  as  well  as  the  building  of  the 
Garhapatya  altar  and  the  installation  of  the  Ukhya  Agni  thereon, 
takes  place  before  the  morning  performance  of  the  Upasads),  and 
on  the  second  day  the  remaining  layers  are  built. 

'^  For  the  construction  in  the  ora/io  directa,  see  part  iii,  p-  34> 
note  2. 

^  Or,  they  went  into  their  shelter  (pra-pad). 


X    KANDA,    2    ADHYAVA,    5    BRAHMAA^A,    5.  317 


bolts,  complete  this  body  (of  Agni)  in  a  place  free 
from  clanoer  and  devilrw 

3.  And  the  Upasads  also  are  the  fervour'  in  the 
sacrifice,  for  they  are  indeed  fervour  ;  and  inasmuch 
as  it  is  built  (I'l)  in  fervour  (tapas)  it  is  called 
'  Tapa^/'ita  -.'  As  long  as  they  perform  the  Upasads 
so  long  (do  they  perform)  the  Pravargya  ■' :  (if)  it 
is  for  a  year  that  they  perform  the  Upasads,  it  is 
for  a  year  (they  perform)  the  Pravargya. 

4.  The  Upasads,  indeed,  are  the  days  and  nights, 
and  the  Pravargya  is  the  sun  :  he  thus  establishes 
yonder  sun  on  the  days  and  nights,  whence  he  is 
established  on  the  days  and  nights. 

5.  And  if  there  are  twenty-four  (Upasad-days  "). 
there  being  twenty-four  half  moons — the    Upasads 

^  Or,  austere  devotion,  see  III,  4,  4,  27,  where  fasting  during  the 
Upasad  days  is  recommended  as  calculated  to  promote  religious 
fervour.  There  is  also,  however,  the  primary  meaning  '  heat '  im- 
plied, whence  the  '  heating'  of  the  cauldron  (gharma  —  ^ep^'J^)  at  the 
Pravargya  (representing  the  sun)  is  connected  with  the  Upasads. 

^  That  is,  the  fire-altar  used  at  the  sacrificial  period  (ayana) 
called  Tapa^X'ita,  which  generally  requires  a  full  year  (360  da}s) 
for  the  performance  of  the  Upasads  (as  do  also  the  Diksha 
before  them,  and  the  performance  of  the  Soma-sacrifice  after 
them);  cf.  XII,  3,  3,  10  seq. ;  Katy.  XIV,  5,  i.— A^val.  XII, 
5,  9  ;  Katy.  XXIV,  5,  7,  however,  mention  a  Tapaj-/('ita  which 
only  requires  four  months  for  each  of  the  three  periods,  or 
a  year  altogether,  whilst  the  maximum  duration  is  by  Asv.  fixed 
at  thirty-six  years  (twelve  for  each  period) ;  and  by  Katy.  at  three 
years  for  the  Upasads  and  a  year  for  each  of  the  two  other 
ceremonies. 

^  See  part  ii,  p.  104. 

*  Sayawa  does  not  specify  what  sacrificial  performance  is  in- 
tended as  requiring  twenty-four  Upasatl-days,  but  merely  says  that 
they  arc  required  '  kratuvijeshe,'  at  some  special  kind  of  sacrifice. 
At  all  events,  the  Sacrificer  would  be  at  liberty  to  adopt  that 
numlicr  of  Upasad-days  instead  of  the  minimum  of  days  prescribed, 
if  he  hoped  to  derive  special  benefit  therefrom. 


^l8  DATAPATH  A-BRAHMAiVA. 


are  the  half-moons,  and  the  Pravargya  is  the  sun  : 
he  thus  establishes  yonder  sun  on  the  half-moons, 
whence  he  is  established  on  the  half-moons. 

6.  And  if  there  are  twelve  (Upasad-days)  ^ — 
there  being  twelve  months — the  Upasads  are  the 
months,  and  the  Pravargya  is  the  sun  :  he  thus 
establishes  yonder  sun  on  the  months,  whence  he  is 
established  on  the  months. 

7.  And  if  there  are  six  (Upasad-days) — there 
being  six  seasons — the  Upasads  are  the  seasons, 
and  the  Pravargya  is  the  sun  :  he  thus  establishes 
yonder  sun  in  the  seasons,  whence  he  is  established 
in  the  seasons. 

8.  And  if  there  are  three  (Upasad-days) — there 
being  these  three  worlds — the  Upasads  are  these 
three  worlds,  and  the  Pravargya  is  the  sun  :  he  thus 
establishes  yonder  sun  in  these  worlds,  whence  he  is 
established  in  these  worlds. 

9.  Now,  then,  the  inquiry  as  to  the  earth-layers 
of  the  altar-pile.  One  month  (the  building  of)  the 
first  layer  (of  bricks  takes),  and  one  month  the  layer 
of  earth  ^, — so  long  desire  (lasts)  in  the  spring  season 
(of  two  months)  :  he  thus'^  builds  for  himself  a  body 
so  as  to  obtain  all  of  whatever  desire  there  is  in  the 
spring  season  ^ 

1  For  an  ordinary  Ekaha,  or  one  da3''s  Soma-sacrifice,  the 
Upasads  may  be  performed  for  twelve  days  instead  of  tiie  usual 
three  days  (Katy.VIII,  2,  40).  It  is  also  the  regular  number  of  days 
for  Ahinas  (ib.  XIII,  i,  i ;  Asv.  IV,  8,  15)  and  for  most  sattras. 

^  That  is,  when  the  Upasads  last  for  a  whole  year,  as  at  the 
Tapa^^ita. 

■^  That  is,  by  building  for  his  Soma-sacrifice  an  altar  the  body 
of  which  requires  a  whole  year  in  being  laid  down,  as  it  does  in  the 
Tapaj/C'ita. 

*  Translated  literally,   the  sentence  would  run  thus :  '  Thus  as 


X    KAA^DA,    2    ADHVAYA,    5    BRAHMAA'A,     1 4.  319 


10.  One  month  the  second  {layer  of  bricks  takes), 
and  one  month  the  layer  of  earth, — so  long  desire 
(lasts)  in  the  summer  season  :  he  thus  builds  for 
himself  a  body  so  as  to  obtain  all  of  whatever  desire 
there  is  in  the  summer  season. 

11.  One  month  the  third  (layer  of  bricks  takes), 
and  one  month  the  layer  of  earth, — so  long  desire 
(lasts)  in  the  rainy  season  :  he  thus  builds  for  himself 
a  body  so  as  to  obtain  all  of  whatever  desire  there 
is  in  the  rainy  reason. 

12.  One  month  the  fourth  (layer  of  bricks  takes), 
and  one  month  the  layer  of  earth, — so  long  desire 
(lasts)  in  the  autumn  season  :  he  thus  builds  for 
himself  a  body  so  as  to  obtain  all  of  whatever  desire 
there  is  in  the  autumn  season. 

13.  And  of  the  fifth  layer  (of  bricks)  he  lays  down 
the  Asapatna  and  Vira^  (bricks)  on  the  first  day, 
and  of  the  Stomabh^gas  one  each  day  :  these  he 
'  settles '  together  once,  and  pronounces  once  the 
SLldadohas-formula  over  them  ^  For  a  month  they 
silendy  apply  the  earth-layer  for  the  Stomabhagas, 
for  so  long  desire  (lasts)  in  the  winter  season  :  thus 
he  builds  for  himself  a  body  so  as  to  obtain  all  of 
whatever  desire  there  is  in  the  winter  season. 

14.  One  month  the  sixth  (layer  of  bricks  takes), 

much  desire  as  there  is  in  the  spring  season — he  builds  for  himself 
a  body  so  as  to  obtain  all  that  (desire).'  Only  the  building  of  an 
altar  (body)  for  a  whole  year  ensures  the  full  fruition  of  sensual 
pleasures  supplied  during  the  year. 

^  That  is,  these  three  kinds  of  bricks — the  five  Asapatnas,  and 
forty  Vira^s  being  laid  down  on  the  first  day,  and  of  the  twenty-nine 
Stomabhagas  one  each  day, — the  three  kinds  of  bricks  thus  lake 
one  month  in  being  laid  down,  after  which  the  '  sadanam '  and 
'Sudadohas'  (cf  part  iii,  p.  301,  note  3)  are  performed  upon 
them. 


320  5'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

and  one  month  the  layer  of  earth, — so  long  desire 
(lasts)  in  the  dewy  season  :  he  thus  builds  for  himself 
a  body  so  as  to  obtain  all  of  whatever  desire  there 
is  in  the  dewy  season.  So  long,  indeed,  desire  (lasts) 
in  the  twelve  months  and  the  six  seasons  :  he  thus 
builds  for  himself  a  body  so  as  to  obtain  all  of 
whatever  desire  there  is  in  the  twelve  months  and 
the  six  seasons. 

15.  And  in  addition  to  these  there  are  three  days  \ 
to  wit,  the  day  on  which  he  performs  the  ^'atarudriya 
offering,  the  day  of  preparation,  and  the  day  on 
which  the  Soma  is  pressed.  When  they  perform 
the  Upasad  on  these  days,  these  (days)  are  the  days 
and  nights  of  that  (thirteenth,  or  intercalary)  month  : 
and  when  (they  perform)  the  Pravargya,  he  thereby 
establishes  yonder  sun  also  in  that  (seventh)  season, 
— so  long,  indeed,  desire  (lasts)  in  the  thirteen 
months  and  the  seven  seasons  :  he  thus  builds  for 
himself  a  body  so  as  to  obtain  all  of  whatever  desire 
there  is  in  thirteen  months  and  seven  seasons. 

16.  For  a  year  Soma  should  be  pressed, — the 
year  is  everything,  and  the  one  hundred  and 
one-fold  (altar)  is  everything  :  by  means  of  every- 
thing he  thus  gains  everything.  Should  he  be 
unable  (to  press  Soma)  for  a  year,  he  should 
perform    the  Vi^va^it    Atiratra  "  with  all  the    Vn- 


^  Viz.  after  the  twenty-eight  days  of  the  twelfth  month  two  days 
remain  to  make  up  the  year,  so  that  the  (first)  Sutya  day  (pressing 
day)  takes  place  after  the  expiry  of  a  full  year. 

-  The  Vi^vn_o-it,  as  usually  performed,  is  an  Agnish/oma  sacrifice, 
the  twelve  Stotras  of  which  are  chanted  in  three  different  stomas  or 
hymn-forms,  viz.  the  first  four  in  the  trivm  (nine-versed),  the  next 
four  in  the  pa?7/('adaja  (fifteen-versed),  and  the  last  four  in  the 
saptadaja   (seventeen-versed)    stoma.     For   the   stotriya-texts   see 


X    KAiVDA,    2    ADHVAVA,    6    BRAHMAA^A,     I.  32  [ 

sh///as  \  and  at  that  (sacrifice)  he  should  give  away 
all  his  property-;  for  the  Vii-va^It  (all-conquering) 
Atiratra  with  all  the  Pr/sh///as  means  everything, 
and  all  one's  property  means  everything,  and  the 
one  hundred  and  one-fold  (altar)  means  every- 
thing :  by  means  of  everything  he  thus  gains 
everything. 

Sixth  BRAHMAivA. 

1.   The    one    hundred    and    one-fold     Pra^apati, 
doubtless,  is  the  year,  and  thereto  belong  days  and 


Taz/^ya-Br.  XVI,  5,  i  seq.  It  is  closely  united  with  the  Abhi^it 
Soma-day — the  stotras  of  which  are  performed  in  four  stomas,  viz. 
three  in  each  of  those  used  for  the  Vi^vai,'-it,  and  the  last  three  in  the 
ekaviw/ja,  or  twenty-one-versed,  stoma — widi  which  it  may,  indeed, 
be  combined  in  one  and  the  same  performance  ;  and  both  form  part 
of  the  sacrificial  session  called  Gavani  ayanam  (part  ii,  p.  427).  The 
Vijva_o-it  (as  well  as  the  Abhij^nt)  may,  however,  also  be  performed  as 
an  Atiiatra  instead  of  Agnish/oma,  and  in  that  case  the  sequence  of 
Stomas  is  entirely  different,  their  order  being  as  follows :  the  first 
four  stotras  are  performed  in  the  fir^^t  four  stomas  (triv;7't,  paw/ta- 
daja,  saptadaja,  ckaviwj-a) ;  the  next  four  stotras  in  the  four  stomas 
beginning  with  the  second  stoma  (up  to  tri«ava),  and  the  next  four 
stotras  in  the  four  stomas  beginning  with  the  third  stoma  (up  to 
trayastr/>//ja).  Of  the  three  Uklhastotras,  the  first  is  performed  in 
the  triwava,  and  the  two  others  in  the  ekaviwja  ;  the  Shot/ajin  in 
its  own  (ekavi/«ja)  form  ;  the  night-chants  in  the  pa;/X'ada^a ;  and 
the  twilight-chant  in  the  trivr/t-stoma.     See  Ta//</ya-Br.  XX,  9. 

^  On  '  sarvapr/shMa '  Soma-days,  sec  part  iii,  introduction,  pp. 
XX  seq. 

^  As  an  equivalent  for  one"s  '  whole  property  (sarvavedasa,  sarva- 
sva),'  Katyayana  (XXll,  2,  26.27)  enumerates  '  cows,  oxen,  ploughs, 
sacks  of  corn  (or  corn-sacks),  pairs  of  slaves,  waggons,  animals  for 
riding,  houses  (or  sheds),  and  couches.'  For  other  similar  enu- 
merations, see  A.  Weber,  Omina  and  Portenta  (Abh.  of  Berl.  Acad. 
1858),  p.  398. 

[43]  Y 


^•ATAPATHA-BRAHMAA^A. 


nights,  half-months,  months,  and  seasons.  The 
days  and  nights  of  a  month  are  sixty,  and  in  the 
month,  doubtless,  the  days  and  nights  of  the  year 
are  obtained  ;  and  there  are  twenty-four  half-months, 
thirteen  months,  and  three  seasons  (of  four  months) 
— that  makes  a  hundred  parts,  and  the  year  itself 
is  the  one  hundred  and  first  part. 

2„  By  the  seasons  it  is  sevenfold, — six  seasons 
(of  two  months),  and  the  year  itself  as  the  seventh 
part.  And  he  who  shines  yonder  is  the  light  of  that 
year  :  his  rays  are  a  hundredfold,  and  the  (sun's) 
disk  itself  is  the  one  hundred  and  first  part. 

3.  By  the  regions  it  is  sevenfold, — the  rays  which 
are  in  the  eastern  region  are  one  part,  and  those  in  the 
southern  are  one,  and  those  in  the  western  are  one, 
and  those  in  the  northern  are  one,  and  those  in  the 
upper  (region)  are  one,  and  those  in  the  lower  (region) 
are  one,  and  the  disk  itself  is  the  seventh  part. 

4.  Beyond  this  (year)  lies  the  wish-granting  world  ; 
but  the  wish-granting  one  is  the  immortal  (element) : 
it  is  thus  the  immortal  that  lies  beyond  this  (year, 
temporal  existence)  ;  and  that  same  immortal  (ele- 
ment) is  that  very  light  which  shines  yonder. 

5.  Now  that  same  boon  (the  immortal  light),  bright 
with  wealth,  he,  Savit/'/  (the  sun),  distributes  among 
the  distributed  creatures,  and  among  plants  and 
trees,  too  ;  and  to  some,  indeed,  he  gives  more  of  it, 
and  to  some  less  ;  and  they  to  whom  he  gives  more 
of  it  live  longest,  and  they  to  whom  he  gives  less 
live  less  long. 

6.  It  is  regarding  this  that  it  is  said  in  the  Rik 
(I,  22,  7  ;  Vaf.  S.  XXX,  4),  '  The  distributer  of 
wealth,  the  bright  boon,  we  invoke,  Savit;/, 
the    beholder   of    men.'      And    that    is    the    full 


X  KANDA,    2    ADHYAVA,  6  BRAHMAA'A,  8.    323 

(measure  of)  life,  for  it  is  long,  it  is  unending  ^  ;  and 
when  people  here  say,  '  May  thy  life  be  long ! 
mayest  thou  reach  the  full  (extent  of)  life ! '  it  is  as 
much  as  to  say,  'May  that  world,  may  that  (im- 
mortal light)  be  thine  ! ' 

7.  It  is  Va/C'  (Speech)  that,  seeing  it,  speaks 
(thus).  That  same  (immortal  light),  indeed,  is  to  be 
obtained  either  by  the  one  hundred  and  one-fold 
(altar),  or  by  a  life  of  a  hundred  years  :  whosoever 
builds  a  one  hundred  and  one-fold  (altar),  or  whoso- 
ever lives  a  hundred  years,  he,  indeed,  obtains  that 
immortality.  Therefore,  whether  they  know  it,  or 
whether  they  do  not,  people  say,  '  The  life  of  a 
hundred  years  makes  for  heaven.'  Hence  one  ought 
not  to  yield  to  his  own  desire  and  pass  away  before 
(he  has  attained)  the  full  extent  of  life,  for  (such 
shortening  of  one's  life)  does  not  make  for  the 
heavenly  world  - ;  and  these  are  indeed  the  worlds, 
to  wit,  the  days  and  nights,  the  half-moons,  moons, 
and  seasons,  and  the  year. 

8.  Those  who  pass  away  in  the  years  below 
twenty  are  consigned  to  the  days  and  nights  as  their 
worlds  ;  and  those  who  (pass  away)  in  the  years 
above  twenty  and  below  forty,  to  the  half-moons  ; 
and  those  who  (pass  away)  in  the  (years)  above  forty 
and  below  sixty,  to  the  months ;  and  those  who 
(pass  away)    in    the   (years)  above  sixty  and  below 

^  Thus  Sayawa — tad  etat  sarvam  ayur  iti  sarvapadasyarlham  aha, 
dirgham  ananta/«  hi. 

^  Literally,  '  conducive  to  the  world,'  or,  perhaps,  '  conducive  10 
a  place  (in  yonder  world).'  Sayawa  interprets  it  by — his  death  is 
'  alokyam,'  that  is,  not  procuring  the  world  consisting  of  immortality. 
Some  such  meaning  as  '  (such  conduct)  is  not  world-winning  '  seems 
to  be  implied  by  the  words  which  follow. 

\'   2 


324  i-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

eighty,  to  the  seasons  ;  and  those  who  (pass  away) 
in  the  (years)  above  eighty  and  below  a  hundred  (are 
consigned)  to  the  year ;  and  he  alone  who  lives 
a  hundred  years  or  more  attains  to  that  immortal 

(lite). 

9.  Only  by  many  sacrifices,  indeed,  is  a  single 
day,  or  a  single  night  (of  life)  gained ;  and  only  he 
who  builds  the  one  hundred  and  one-fold  (altar),  or 
he  who  lives  a  hundred  years,  is  certain  of  his 
attaining  to  that  immortal  (life).  But  he,  indeed, 
builds  a  one  hundred  and  one-fold  (altar)  who 
carries  him  (Ukhya  Agni)  for  a  year:  hence  one 
should  only  build  (an  altar  for)  such  an  (Agni)  who 
has  been  carried  for  a  year.  Thus  much  as  to  the 
deity. 

10.  Now  as  to  the  sacrifice.  When  he  measures 
out  those  one  hundred  and  one  men  (man's  lengths) 
with  upstretched  arms,  that  is  a  one  hundred  and 
one-fold  (altar)  in  form,  and  a  sevenfold  one  in 
respect  of  its  layers  :  the  layers  contain  six  seasonal^ 
(bricks)  and  the  fire  (or  altar)  itself  is  the  seventh 
form, 

11.  And,  indeed,  it  is  a  hundred  and  one-fold  in 
respect  of  bricks, — the  first  fifty  bricks  and  the  last 
fifty  ^  which  are  (laid  down)  make  a  hundred  forms 
(parts)  ;  and  the  bricks  which  are  laid  down  between 
(those  two  sets)  are  the  one  hundred  and  first  form. 

^  The  five  layers  contain  five  sets  of  two  such  bricks,  each 
representing  the  two  months  of  the  respective  season ;  except  the 
third  layer,  which  contains  four  such  bricks,  only,  however,  of  half 
the  thickness  of  the  others. 

^  According  to  Sayawa,  this  refers  to  the  fifty  Pra«abhr/ts  in  the 
first,  and  to  the  forty  Vira^s,  five  Nakasads,  and  five  Pa/7/('a/'u</as  in 
the  fifth  layer. 


X    KAA^DA,    2    ADHYAYA,    6    BRAHMAiVA,     1 4.         325 

12.  And,  having  the  Ya^us  for  its  hght,  it  is 
a  hundred  and  one-fold  in  respect  of  the  Ya^us 
(formulas), — the  first  fifty  and  the  last  fifty  which 
are  (used)  make  a  hundred  forms  ;  and  the  Ya^us 
which  are  used  between  them  are  the  one  hundred 
and  first  form.  In  this  vvay  also  the  sevenfold 
one  becomes  a  hundred  and  one-fold,  and  whosoever 
knows  this  obtains  even  by  the  sevenfold  one  what- 
ever wish  there  is  both  in  a  life  of  a  hundred  years 
and  in  the  one  hundred  and  one-fold  (altar). 

13.  In  this  way,  indeed,  all  sacrifices^  up  to  the 
Agnihotra  are  a  hundred  and  one-fold  by  way  of 
verses,  formulas,  words,  syllables,  rites,  and  hymn- 
tunes;  and  whosoever  knows  this  obtains  by  every 
sacrifice  whatever  wish  there  is  either  in  a  life  of 
a  hundred  years,  or  in  the  one  hundred  and  one-fold 
(altar),  or  in  the  sevenfold  one.  Thus  much  as  to 
the  sacrifice. 

14.  Now  as  to  the  body.  There  are  these  four 
sets  of  five  fingers  and  toes,  the  two — wrist  and 
elbow-, — the  arm,  the  shoulder-blade,  and  the 
collarbone, — that  makes  twenty-five  ;  and  in  the 
same  way  (each  of)  these  other  limbs, — that  makes 
a  hundred  parts,  and  the  trunk  itself  is  the  one 
hundred  and  first  part.  As  regards  the  sevenfold 
state  this  has  been  explained  -K 


^  That  is,  according  to  Saya«a,  all  Soma-sacrifices, — ekahas, 
ahinas,  sattras,  &c.  In  this  case  we  should  perhaps  translate, 
'down  lo  the  Agnihotra,'  that  being  the  simplest  kind  of  Soma- 
sacrilice. 

2  'I'his  meaning  is  assigned  by  Sayawa  to  '  kalkushi '  (  =  ma«i- 
bandhdratni) ;  it  cannot  mean  here  'the  two  wrists'  (?  'kalyusha,' 
JNIon.  Will.  Diet.),  as  both  must  be  parts  of  the  same  limb. 

3  Viz.  X,  2,  2,  I.  5  (VI,  I,  I,  I  seq.). 


^26  ^-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 


15.  And,  having  the  vital  air  for  its  light,  it  is 
a  hundred  and  one-fold  by  the  vital  airs  limb  by 
limb,  for  there  is  vital  air  in  each  limb  :  whosoever 
knows  this  obtains,  even  by  his  knowledge,  what- 
ever wish  there  is  in  a  life  of  a  hundred  years, 
or  in  the  one  hundred  and  one-fold  (altar),  or  in  the 
sevenfold  one,  or  in  all  sacrifices;  for  he  has  obtained 
a  body  perfected  by  all  the  sacrifices. 

16.  Now,  there  are  these  three  fivefold  (objects), 
the  year,  the  fire,  and  man  :  their  five  forms  are 
food,  drink,  well-being  \  light,  and  immortality. 
Whatever  food  there  is  in  the  year,  that  is  its 
food  ;  whatever  water,  that  is  its  drink  ;  its  well-being 
is  the  night,  for  in  the  night,  as  in  well-being 
(contentment  or  goodness),  all  beings  dwell  to- 
gether 2;  its  light  is  the  day,  and  its  immortal 
element  the  sun.     Thus  much  as  to  the  deity. 

17.  Now  as  t®  the  sacrifice.  Whatever  food  is 
placed  on  the  fire,  that  is  its  food,  and  whatever 
water,  that  is  its  water ;  its  well-being  is  the 
enclosing-stones,  for  they  are  of  the  nature  of 
nights  ^ ;  its  light  the  (bricks)  with  special  formulas, 
for  they  are  of  the  nature  of  days ;  and  its  immortal 


^  Or,  perhaps,  goodness,  excellence  {sr\). 

'  According  to  Sayawa,  this  is  an  etymological  play  on  the  word 
'  sr'i '  (well-being,  contentment,  peace),  as  connected  with  the  verb 
'  sv'i'- — ^riyanti  nivasanty  asmin  kala  iti  ratri^  ^ruabdavaX'ya.  Cf.  II, 
3,  1,  3,  where,  with  the  Ka^/va,  we  have  to  read,  '  ilita  hi  j-ere 
(aerate,  K.)  sa;«^ana/z' — 'for  (when  the  sun  has  set)  those  who  are 
at  variance  with  one  another  lie  quiet  (together).' 

^  Viz.  inasmuch  as  they  enclose  the  altar,  and  protect  it  on  all 
sides.  Cf.  VII,  I,  I,  12  seq.,  where  the  enclosing-stones  are  said 
to  represent  the  womb  in  which  the  embryo  Agni  is  contained; 
and  are  also  compared  with  the  ocean  which  flows  round  the  earth 
like  a  protecting  moat. 


X    KANDA,    3    ADIIYAYA,     I     BRAIIMAA^A,     I.         327 

element  the  fire,  for  that  is  of  the  nature  of  the  sun. 
Thus  much  as  to  the  sacrifice, 

18.  Now  as  to  the  body.  Whatever  food  there 
is  in  man,  that  is  his  food  ;  whatever  water,  that  is 
his  water ;  his  well-being  (safety,  strength)  is  the 
bones,  for  they  are  of  the  nature  of  enclosing-stones; 
his  lieht  the  marrow,  for  that  is  of  the  nature  of  the 
ya^ushmatt  (bricks) ;  his  immortal  element  the 
breath,  for  that  is  of  the  nature  of  fire ; — and, 
indeed,  people  say,  '  The  breath  is  fire,  the  breath 
is  the  immortal.' 

19.  Now,  hunger  ceases  through  food,  thirst 
through  drink,  evil  through  well-being  (goodness), 
darkness  through  light,  and  death  through  im- 
mortality ;  and,  in  truth,  whosoever  knows  this 
from  him  all  these  pass  away,  and  he  conquers 
recurring  death,  and  attains  the  whole  (perfect)  life. 
And  let  him  hold  this  to  be  immortality  in  yonder 
world  and  life  here  below.  Some,  indeed,  hold  it 
to  be  breath,  saying,  '  The  breath  is  fire,  the  breath 
is  the  immortal;'  but  let  him  not  believe  this,  for 
something  uncertain  is  breath.  And  regarding  this 
it  has  also  been  said  in  the  Ya^us  (Va^^-.  S.  XII.  65), 
'  That  (bond)  of  thine  I  unloose,  as  from  the  middle 
of  Ayus  (life) : '  let  him  therefore  hold  it  to  be 
immortality  in  yonder  world,  and  life  here  below, 
and  thus,  indeed,  he  attains  the  whole  life. 

Third  Adiiyava.     First  Brahmaata. 

I.  The  Gayatri  is  the  breath  (of  Pra^apati,  the 
altar),  the  Ush/^ih  the  eye,  the  Anush/ubh  the  voice, 
the  B/'?hati  the  mind,  the  Pankti  the  ear;  the 
Trish/ubh  is  that  generative  breath  ;  and  the  6^agati 


328  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAA^A. 


that  downward  breathing; — these  are  the  seven 
metres  increasing  by  four  (syllables)  each  \  which 
are  produced  in  Agni  (the  fire-altar). 

2.  '  The  Gayatri  is  the  breath,' — thus,  whatever 
power,  whatever  vigour  there  is  in  the  breath  that 
is  this  one  thousand  ;  and  to  the  breath,  indeed, 
this  vioour  belono^s  ;  for  were  the  breath  of  him 
who  builds  it  to  pass  away,  this  fire-altar,  assuredly, 
would  not  be  built :  by  this  its  form  that  (altar) 
becomes  built  (so  as  to  contain)  a  thousand 
Gayatris. 

3.  '  The  Ush/nh  is  the  eye,' — thus,  whatever 
power,  whatever  vigour  there  is  in  the  eye  that 
is  this  one  thousand  ;  and  to  the  eye,  indeed,  this 
vigour  belongs,  for  were  the  eye-sight  of  him  who 
builds  it  to  pass  away,  this  fire-altar,  assuredly, 
would  not  be  built :  by  this  its  form  that  (altar) 
becomes  built  (so  as  to  contain)  a  thousand  Ush;nhs. 

4.  '  The  Anush/ubh  is  the  voice,' — thus,  whatever 
power,  whatever  vigour  there  is  in  the  voice  that 
is  this  one  thousand  ;  and  to  the  voice,  indeed,  this 
vigour  belongs,  for  were  the  voice  of  him  who  builds 
it  to  pass  away,  this  fire-altar,  assuredly,  would  not 
be  built :  by  this  its  form  that  (altar)  becomes  built 
(so  as  to  contain)  a  thousand  Anush/ubhs. 

5.  'The  B/'/hati  is  the  mind,'— thus,  whatever 
powder,  whatever  vigour  there  is  in  the  mind  that 
is  this  one  thousand  ;  and  to  the  mind,  indeed,  this 
vigour  belones,  for  were  the  mind  of  him  who 
builds    it    to    pass    away,    this    fire-altar,   assuredly, 


^  The  Gayatn  verse  consists  of  twenty-four  syllables ;  and  each 
of  the  following  increases  by  four  syllables,  the  Gagati  consisting 
of  4  X  12,  or  forty-eight  syllables. 


X    KAA^DA,    3    ADHYAVA,     I     BRAHMAA^A,  9.  329 

would  not  be  built :  by  this  its  form  that  (altar) 
becomes  built  (so  as  to  contain)  a  thousand 
Br/hatis. 

6.  '  The  Pahkti  is  the  ear,' — thus,  whatever 
power,  whatever  vigour  there  is  in  the  ear  that 
is  this  one  thousand;  and  to  the  ear,  indeed,  this 
vigour  belongs,  for  were  the  power  of  hearing 
of  him  who  builds  it  to  pass  away,  this  fire-altar, 
assuredly,  would  not  be  built :  by  this  its  form  that 
(altar)  becomes  built  (so  as  to  contain)  a  thousand 
Paiiktis. 

7.  '  The  Trish/ubh  is  that  generative  (life-giving) 
breath,' — thus,  whatever  power,  whatever  vigour 
there  is  in  that  breath,  that  is  this  one  thousand  ; 
and  to  that  breath,  indeed,  this  vigour  belongs, 
for  were  that  breath  of  him  who  builds  it  to  become 
disordered,  this  fire-altar,  assuredly,  would  not  be 
built :  by  this  its  form  that  (altar)  becomes  built 
(so  as  to  contain)  a  thousand  Trish/ubhs. 

8.  '  And  the  Caofati  is  that  down\\  ard  breathinof,' — 
thus,  whatever  power,  whatever  vigour  there  is  in 
that  breathing,  that  is  this  one  thousand  ;  and  to 
that  breathing,  indeed,  this  vigour  belongs,  for 
were  that  breathing  of  him  who  builds  it  to 
become  disordered,  this  fire-altar,  assuredly,  would 
not  be  built  :  by  this  its  form  that  (altar)  becomes 
built  (so  as  to  include)  a  thousand  (S'agatis. 

9.  Now,  these  seven  metres  which  increase  by 
four  (syllables)  successively,  and  are  firmly  estab- 
lished in  one  another,  are  those  seven  vital  airs  ^  in 
man,   firmly  established    in    one   another  :   thus,   by 

^  Viz.  those  enumerated  in  the  preceding  paragraphs,  including 
those  passing  through  the  eye,  ear,  &c. 


2,2,0  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 


as  much  as  the  number  of  metres  he  utters  has 
that  (altar)  of  him  who  knows  this,  prayers  uttered 
upon  it  in  metre  after  metre,  or  hymns  chanted,  or 
j-astras  recited,  or  (bricks)  laid  down  upon  it. 

Second  BRAHMAivA. 

1.  As  to  this  they  say,  'What  metre  and  what 
deity  are  the  head  of  the  fire-altar  ? '  The  metre 
Gayatri  and  the  deity  Agni  are  its  head. 

2.  '  What  metre  and  what  deity  are  its  neck  ? ' 
The  metre  Ush;<?ih  and  the  deity  Savitrz  are  its 
neck. 

3.  '  What  metre  and  what  deity  are  its  spine  ? ' 
The  metre  B/Vhati  and  the  deity  B/'/haspati  are 
its  spine. 

4.  '  What  metre  and  what  deity  are  its  wings  ? ' 
The  metres  Br/hat  and  Rathantara  and  the  deities 
Heaven  and  Earth  are  its  wings. 

5.  '  What  metre  and  what  deity  are  its  waist  ?  ' 
The  metre  Trish/ubh  and  the  deity  Indra  are  its 
waist. 

6.  '  Wliat  metre  and  what  deity  are  its  hips  ? ' 
The  metre  6"agati  and  the  deity  Aditya  (the  sun) 
are  its  hips. 

7.  '  What  metre  and  what  deity  are  the  vital  air 
whence  the  seed  flows  ? '  The  metre  Ati/'/^andas 
and  the  deity  Pra^apati, 

8.  '  What  metre  and  what  deity  are  that  downward 
vital  air  ? '  The  metre  Ya^;^aya^;^iya  and  the  deity 
Vaii'vanara. 

9.  '  What  metre  and  what  deity  are  the  thighs  ? ' 
The  metre  Anush/ubh  and  that  deity,  the  Vi.sve- 
deva/^,  are  the  thighs. 


X    KAA'DA,    3    ADHYAVA,    3    BRAIIMAA^\,    I.  33 1 

10.  '  What  metre  and  what  deity  are  the  knees  ?  ' 
The  metre  Paiikti  and  that  deity,  the  Maruts,  are 
the  knees. 

11.  'What  metre  and  what  deity  are  the  feet?' 
The  metre  Dvipada  and  the  deity  Vish/^u  are 
the  feet. 

12.  'What  metre  and  what  deity  are  the  vital 
airs  ? '  The  metre  Vi/'/mndas  and  the  deity  Vayu 
(the  wind)  are  the  vital  airs. 

13.  '  What  metre  and  what  deity  are  the  defective 
and  redundant  parts  ? '  The  metre  (of  the  verse) 
wanting  a  syllable  (or  syllables)  and  that  deity,  the 
waters,  are  the  defective  and  redundant  parts. 
This,  then,  is  the  knowledge  of  the  body  (of  the 
altar),  and  suchlike  is  the  deity  that  enters  into 
this  body ;  and,  indeed,  there  is  in  this  (sacrificial 
performance)  no  other  prayer  for  the  obtainment 
of  heavenly  bliss  \ 

Third  BuAiiMAiVA. 

I.  Dhira  ^'atapar/zeya  once  on  a  time  repaired 
to  Maha^ala  ^  6^abala.  He  said  to  him,  '  Knowing 
what  ^  hast  thou  come  to  me  ? ' — '  Agni  (the  fire) 
I  know.' — 'What  Agni  knowest  thou?' — 'Speech.' — 
'  What  becomes  of  him  who  knows  that  Agni  ? ' — 
'  He  becomes  eloquent  ■*,'  he  said,  'speech  does  not 
fail  him.' 


'  Atragnau  lokyatayai  pu«yalokavaplaye  anya  uktavyatirikta  a^i^ 
prarthana  nasti.     Sayawa. 

^  Literally,  one  who  keeps  a  large  house,  a  lord.  Sayawa, 
liowever,  treats  it  as  a  proper  name. 

^  That  is,  '  with  what  knowledge.' 

*  Or,  perhaps,  possessed  of  a  good  voice.     To  be  '  vagmin '  is 


332  DATAPATH  A-BRAHMAiVA. 

2.  '  Thou  knowest  Agni,'  he  said  ;  '  knowing-  what 
(else)  hast  thou  come  to  me?' — 'Agni  I  know.' — 
'What  Agni  knowest  thou?' — 'The  Eye.'— 'What 
becomes  of  him  who  knows  that  Agni  ?' — '  He 
becomes  seeing,'  he  said ;  '  his  eye  does  not  fail 
him.' 

3.  '  Thou  knowest  Agni,'  he  said  ;  '  knowing  what 
hast  thou  come  to  me  ? ' — '  Agni  I  know.' — '  What 
Aeni  knowest  thou?' — 'The  Mind.' — 'What  be- 
comes  of  him  who  knows  that  Agni  ?' — '  He 
becomes  thoughtful,'  he  said ;  '  his  mind  does  not 
fail  him.' 

4.  '  Thou  knowest  Agni,'  he  said  ;  '  knowing  w^hat 
hast  thou  come  to  me?' — 'Agni  I  know.' — 'What 
Agrni  knowest  thou  ?' — '  The  Ear.' — '  What  becomes 
of  him  who  knows  that  Ao^ni  ?' — '  He  becomes 
hearing,'  he  said  ;   '  his  ear  does  not  fail  him.' 

5.  '  Thou  knowest  Agni,'  he  said  ;  'knowing  what 
hast  thou  come  to  me?' — 'Agni  I  know.' — 'What 
Agni  knowest  thou  ?' — '  The  Agni  who  is  every- 
thing here,  him  I  know.' — On  (hearing)  this  said,  he 
stepped  down  to  him  and  said,  '  Teach  me  that 
Agni,  sir !' 

6.  He  said, — Verily,  that  Agni  is  the  breath  ; 
for  when  man  sleeps,  speech  passes  into  the  breath, 
and  so  do  the  eye,  the  mind,  and  the  ear ;  and 
when  he  awakes,  they  again  issue  from  the  breath. 
Thus  much  as  to  the  body. 

7.  Now  as  to  the  deity.  That  speech  verily  is 
Agni  himself;  and  that  eye  is  yonder  sun  ;  and  that 


enumerated  among  the  necessary  qualifications  of  the  officiating 
priest  by  La/y.  I,  i,  6,  where  the  commentator,  however,  explains 
the  term  either  as  '  ready  of  speech  (vaktu/«  samartha/?),'  or  as 
'  using  correct,  or  elegant,  speech  (sawskr/tava/^).' 


X    KANDA,    3    ADHYAYA,  4    BRAHMAiVA,    2.  ^^T, 

mind  is  that  moon  ;   and  that  ear  is  the  quarters  ; 
and  that  breath  is  the  wind  that  blows  here. 

8.  Now,  when  that  fire  goes  out,  it  is  wafted  up 
in  the  wind  (air),  whence  people  say  of  it,  '  It  has 
expired ",'  for  it  is  wafted  up  in  the  wind.  And 
when  the  sun  sets  it  enters  the  wind,  and  so  does 
the  moon  ;  and  the  quarters  are  established  in  the 
wind,  and  from  out  of  the  wind  they  issue  again. 
And  when  he  who  knows  this  passes  away  irom 
this  world,  he  passes  into  the  fire  by  his  speech, 
into  the  sun  by  his  eye,  into  the  moon  b}'  his  mind, 
into  the  quarters  by  his  ear,  and  into  the  wind  by 
his  breath  ;  and  being  composed  thereof,  he  becomes 
whichever  of  these  deities  he  chooses,  and  is  at 
rest. 

Fourth  Bkahmaa^v. 

A 

1,  ^vetaketu  Aru;^eya-,  once  upon  a  time,  was 
about  to  offer  sacrifice.  His  father  said  to  him, 
'What  priests  hast  thou  chosen  to  officiate?'  He 
said,  '  This  Vai^vavasavya  here  is  my  Hotr?.' 
He  asked  him,  '  Knowest  thou,  Brahma/^a  Vai.fva- 
vasavya, — 

2.  The  four  great  (things)  ?' — '  I  know  them,  sir,' 
he  said. — '  Knowest  thou  the  four  great  ones  of  the 
great  ?' — '  I  know  them,  sir,'  he  said. — '  Knowest 
thou  the  four  rites  (vrata)  ? ' — '  I  know  them,  sir,' 
he  said. — '  Knowest  thou  the  four  rites  of  rites  ?' — 
'  I   know   them,  sir,'  he   said. — '  Knowest   thou   the 


^  Literally,  '  it  has  blown  out,  or  up.' 

"^  That  is,  grandson  of  Aru«a  (Aupave-fi),  and  son  of  (Uddalaka) 
Arum  (II,  3,  I,  31.  34;  IV,  5,  7,  9). 


334  ^-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

four  relating  to  Ka  ^  ?' — '  I  know  them,  sir,'  he  said. 
— '  Knowest  thou  the  four  deepest  of  those  relating 
to  Ka-?' — 'I  know  them,  sir,'  he  said, — 'Knowest 
thou  the  four  flames^?' — 'I  know  them,  sir,'  he 
said. — '  Knowest  thou  the  four  flames  of  flames?' — 
'  I  know  them,  sir,'  he  said. 

3.  'Knowest  thou  the  ArkaV — '  Nay,  but  thou 
wilt  teach  us  ^,  sir !' — '  Knowest  thou  the  two  Arka- 
leaves  ?' — 'Nay,  but  thou  wilt  teach  us,  sir!' — 
'  Knowest  thou  the  two  Arka-flowers  ?' — '  Nay,  but 
thou  wilt  teach  us,  sir!' — 'Knowest  thou  the  two 
pod-leaves  "  of  the  Arka  ?' — '  Nay,  but  thou  wilt 
teach  us,  sir!' — 'Knowest  thou  the  two  coops'  of 
the  Arka  ?' — '  Nay,  but  thou  wilt  teach  us,  sir  !' — 
'Knowest  thou  the  Arka-grains  ?' — '  Nay,  but  thou 
wilt  teach  us,  sir!' — 'Knowest  thou   the  bulge  ^  of 


^  Sayawa  takes  '  kya '  to  mean  '  those  useful  to,  or  pleasing  to 
(hita),  Ka,  i.e.  Pra^^-apati.' 

^  Literally,  '  the  four  Kya  of  the  Kya.'  For  more  symbolical 
speculation  on  these  terms,  see  X,  4,  i,  4. 

^  Or,  fires  (arka),  used  of  the  sun,  the  fire  and  the  lightning,  as 
well  as  of  the  Arka  plant.  Saya;/a,  however,  here  explains  '  arka^^ ' 
by  '  arA'aniya/^'  '  worthy  of  being  praised,  or  honoured.' 

*  That  is,  the  Arka  plant  (Calotropis  gigantea),  apparently  so 
called  (  =  'arka,'  lightning)  from  the  wedge-like  shape  of  its  leaves. 
Cf.  IX,  I,  I,  4,  where  the  leaf  is  used  in  offering  the  6atarudriya 
oblations.  The  other  meanings  of  '  arka,'  especially  that  of  '  flame, 
fire,'  however,  are  likewise  implied  in  these  mystic  speculations. 

^  Or,  simply,  '  Thou  wilt  tell  us,  then  (atha  vai),  sir.' 

'''  ?  Or,  the  pods,  sheaths ;  arkakojyau  koj-yakare  phale  (or  pu/ake). 

Saya«a. 

■^  ?  Or,  'seas'  (samudra).     Saya«a  explains  it  as  two  opened 

'  lip-parts '  at  the  top  of  the  Arka-pod  (arkako^agre  vidalitaushMa- 

bhagau). 

*  That  is,  according  to  the  St.  Petersb.  Diet.,  '  the  globular,  cake- 
shaped,   hardened  cicatrix   of  the  Calotropis  gigantea.'      Sayawa 


X    KANDA,    3    ADHYAYA,    4    IJRAHMAA^A,    5.  335 

the  Arka  ?' — '  Nay,  but  thou  wilt  teach  us,  sir!' — 
'  Knowest  thou  the  root  of  the  Arka  ?' — '  Nay,  but 
thou  wilt  teach  us,  sir !' 

4.  Now,  when  he  said,  '  Knowest  thou  the  four 
great  (things)  ?  Knowest  thou  the  four  great  of 
the  great?' — the  great  one  is  Agni  (the  fire),  and 
the  great  (thing)  of  that  great  one  are  the  plants 
and  trees,  for  they  are  his  food  ;  and  the  great  one 
is  Vayu  (the  wind),  and  the  great  (thing)  of  that 
great  one  are  the  waters,  for  they  are  his  (the  wind's) 
food  ;  and  the  great  one  is  Aditya  (the  sun),  and 
the  great  (thing)  of  that  great  one  is  the  moon,  for 
that  is  his  food  ;  and  the  great  one  is  Man,  and  the 
great  (thing)  of  that  great  one  is  cattle,  for  they  are 
his  food  : — these  are  the  four  great  things,  these  the 
four  great  of  the  great ; — these  are  the  four  rites, 
these  the  four  rites  of  rites  ;— these  are  the  four 
relating  to  Ka,  these  the  four  deepest  relating  to 
Ka  ; — these  are  the  four  flames,  these  the  four 
flames  of  flames. 

5.  And  when  he  said,  '  Knowest  thou  the  Arka  ?' 
he  thereby  meant  man  ;— '  Knowest  thou  the  two 
Arka-leaves  ? '  he  thereby  meant  his  ears; — 
'Knowest  thou  the  two  Arka-flowers  ?'  he  thereby 
meant  his  eyes  ; — '  Knowest  thou  the  pod-leaves 
of  the  Arka?'  he  thereby  meant  his  nostrils; — 
'  Knowest  thou  the  two  coops  of  the  Arka  ?'  he 
thereby  meant  his  lips  ; — '  Knowest  thou  the  Arka- 
grains  ?'  he  thereby  meant  his  teeth  ; — '  Knowest 
thou  the  bulge  of  the  Arka  ?'  he  thereby  meant  his 
tonorue  ; — '  Knowest  thou   the  root  of  the   Arka  ?' 


explains  it  by,  '  arkakojamadhye  vistarewa  (?  v.  1.  ^ihvastara7/a-) 
vartamana  tuli.' 


^?6  ^'ATAPATHA-BRAHMATVA. 

he  thereby  meant  his  food.  Now  that  Arka,  to  wit, 
man,  is  Agni ;  and  verily,  whoso  regards  Agni  as 
the  Arka  and  the  man,  in  his  (akar-)  body  that  Agni, 
the  Arka,  will  be  built  up  even  through  the  know- 
ledoe  that  '  I  here  am  AQ^ni.  the  Arka.' 

Fifth  BRAHMAivA. 

1.  Now,  the  Ya^Lis,  indeed,  is  he  who  blows  here, 
for  even  whilst  passing  along  he  (Vayu,  the  wind) 
generates  (vivifies)  everything  here,  and  after  him 
passing  along  everything  is  generated  :  this  is  why 
the  Yai,'us  is  no  other  than  Va}'u. 

2.  And  the  course  ^  (^u/i)  is  this  space,  to  wit, 
this  air^  for  along  this  space  it  (the  wind)  courses  ; 
and  the  Ya^us  is  both  the  wind  and  the  air — the 
'yat'  and  the  \^'u// ' — whence  (the  name)  Yac^us. 
And  the  '  yat'  (that  which  goes)  is  this  (Adhvaryu)^ 
for  when  he  'goes'  on  (performing),  the  AV/-  and 
Saman  carry  that  Ya^^iis  established  on  the  J^i/c  and 
Saman.  Hence  the  Adhvaryu  performs  his  work 
with  the  very  same  Grahas  (cups  of  Soma),  (while) 
there  are  each  time  ^  different  stotras  (chants)  and 
^astras  (recitations)  :  it  is  just  as  if,  after  driving 
with  a  first  pair  (of  horses),  one  drives  with  a  second 
pair. 

^   '  Guh '  would  rather  seem  to  mean  '  the  urger,  or  speeder.' 

-  '  Yad  idam  antariksham,'  perhaps,  with  the  double  sense — 
'this  air  is  the  "yat  (the  going,  moving  thing)'" — made  use  of 
in  the  sequel.  The  construction,  however,  is  not  quite  clear. 
Sayawa  explains:  ayam  evakaxo  ^ur  iti;  ^u  iti  sautro  dhatur 
gatyartha^  ;  yad  idam  pratiyamanam  antariksham  asti  tad  eva  g^r 
iti ;  yad  evo>^yate— etam  aka^-am  anulakshya  o-avate,  vayur  gaXXV/ati, 
vayu^avamadakara;/a — tva^  gur  aka.sa./i. 

'  Or,  whence  (the  name)  Ya^^us,  to  wit,  this  (Adhvaryu). 

"  That  is,  in  different  Soma-sacrifices. 


X    KANDA,    3    ADIIVAYA,   5   RRAHMAA'A,    7.  ^2>7 

3.  Now  Agni  is  in  front  ^  (puras),  for  placin^r 
Agni  in  front  (of  them)  these  creatures  attend  upon 
him  ;  and  the  sun  is  motion  {Parana),  for  as  soon  as 
he  rises  everything  here  moves  about.  Such  is  the 
Ya<^us  with  the  preparatory  performance  (pura^- 
/'ara;^a  -)  as  regards  the  deities. 

4.  Now  as  regards  the  body.  The  Ya^us  is  the 
breath,  for  whilst  moving  (yat)  it  generates  (vivifies) 
everything  here,  and  along  with  the  moving  breath 
birth  takes  place  here :  hence  the  Ya^us  is  the 
breath. 

5.  And  this  course  (^4^11//)  is  space — this  space 
which  is  inside  the  body — for  along  this  space  it 
(the  breath)  courses  ;  and  the  Ya^us  is  both  the 
breath  and  space, — the  '  yat '  and  the  \o-{x/i ' ;  hence 
'  ya^us.'  And  the  *  yat '  (moving)  is  the  breath, 
for  the  breath  moves. 

6.  The  Ya^^is,  indeed,  is  food,  for  by  food  one  is 
produced,  and  by  food  one  moves.  And  food  carries 
along  that  Ya^us  established  on  food,  whence  even 
different  food  is  introduced  into  the  same  (channel 
of  the)  breath. 

7.  And  the  Mind  is  in  front  (puras),  for  the  mind 
is  the  first  of  vital  airs ;  and  the  eye  is  motion 
(Z'ara^^a),  for  it  is  in  accordance  with  the  eye  that  this 

^  Literally,  apparently,  '  The  in-front  is  Agni.' 

^  This  term,  literally,  '  moving  in  front,'  seems  virtually  to  imply 
the  entire  manual  work  connected  with  the  sacrifice,  and  which, 
along  with  the  muttering  of  the  Ya^us-formulas,  forms  the  official 
duty  of  the  Adhvaryu.  It  would  thus  include  all  the  sacrificial 
performances  prior  to  the  muttering  of  a  Ya^^us,  as  the  finishing 
or  consecratory  rite.  For  a  somewhat  similar  discussion,  see  IV, 
6,  7,  20.  21.  The  commentary  introduces  the  present  discussion 
thus :  atha  brahmawaparanamadheyasya  pura^/^'araz/ajabdasya  pur- 
vavan  nirvaX-anapura/zsaram  acihidaivam  artham  aha. 

[43]  -^ 


-> 


38  i'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 


body  moves.  Such  is  the  Ya^ms  with  the  prepara- 
tory performance,  firmly  estabhshecl  both  as  regards 
the  deity  and  the  body  ;  and,  indeed,  whosoever  thus 
knows  this  Ya^us  with  the  preparatory  performance 
to  be  firmly  established  both  as  regards  the  deity 
and  the  body, — 

8.  He,  indeed,  reaches  successfully  the  end  of  the 
sacrifice,  unscathed  and  uninjured  :  he  w^ho  knows 
this  becomes  the  first,  the  leader  (pura-etr/),  of  his 
own  people,  an  eater  of  food  (i.  e.  prosperous),  and 
a  ruler. 

9.  And  if  any  one  strives  to  become  a  rival  ^ 
among  his  own  people  to  one  who  knows  this,  he 
does  not  satisfy  his  dependants  ;  but,  indeed,  only 
he  satisfies  his  dependants,  who  is  faithful  -  to  that 
one  and  who,  along  with  him,  strives  to  support  his 
dependants. 

10.  And  this  is  the  greatest  Brahman  (n,,  mystic 
science),  for  than  this  there  is  no  thing  greater; 
and,  he  who  knows  this,  being  himself  the  greatest, 
becomes  the  highest  among  his  own  people. 

11.  This  Brahman  has  nothing  before  it  and 
nothing  after  it  ^;  and  whosoever  thus  knows  this 
Brahman  to  have   nothing  before    it    and   nothing 


^  Or,  tries  to  make  opposition,  as  Saya«a  takes  it — ya^  purusha/z 
sveshu  madhye  eva7«vidam  uktavidya/zz  ^ananawz  puruslia/«  prati- 
bubhushati  (!)  pratikulyam  a/^aritum  \kkhzXi. 

2  Thus  '  anu-bhfi '  is  taken  by  the  St.  Petersb.  Diet.  ('  to  serve, 
be  helpful  to'),  and  by  Saya//a — 'yas  tv  evawvidam  anukulayet  sa 
poshyan  poshayitu?«  jaknoti.' 

^  Saya«a  seems  to  take  '  aparavat '  in  the  sense  of  '  it  has  (only) 
something  after  it' — srash/avya^agadrupaparavat — and  the  use  of 
the  word  '  aparapurusha//  (descendants) '  immediately  after  might 
indeed  seem  to  favour  that  interpretation. 


X    KAiVDA,    3    ADHYAYA,    5    BRAHMAA^A,     1 3.        339 

after  it,  than  he  there  is  no  one  hio-her  amonsf  his 
equals  in  station ;  and  ever  higher  will  be  the 
descendants  that  spring  from  him.  Wherefore,  if 
any  one  would  be  greater  than  he,  let  him  rever- 
entially approach  the  regions  in  front  (to  the  east- 
ward) of  that  one  in  this  way,  and  he  will  do  him 
no  injury  \ 

I  2.  But,  indeed,  the  mystic  import  (upanishad)  is 
the  essence  of  this  Ya/us  ;  and  thus,  if,  with  ever  so 
small  a  ya^us-formula,  the  Adhvaryu  draws  a  cup 
of  Soma,  that  (essence)  is  equal  to  both  the  Stotra 
and  the  ^'astra,  and  comes  \tp  to  both  the  Stotra 
and  the  6astra :  hence,  however  small  the  essence 
(flavour)  of  food,  it  benefits  (renders  palatable) 
the  whole  food,   and  pervades  the   whole  food. 

1 3.  Satiation  (contentment),  doubtless,  is  the 
successful  issue  thereof  (to  wit,  of  food,  and  the 
Ya^^us) :  hence  when  one  is  satiated  by  food  he 
feels  like  one  who  has  succeeded.  And  joy,  the 
knowledge  thereof  (viz.  of  the  essence,  the  mystic 
import),  is  its  soul  (self) ;  and,  assuredly,  all  the 
gods  are  of  joyful  soul  ;  and  this,  the  true  know- 
ledge, belongs  to  the  gods  alone, — and,  indeed, 
whosoever  knows  this  is  not  a  man,  but  one  of 
the  QTods. 

'  The  i\lSS.  of  the  commentary  (I.  O.  613.  149)  are  unfortunately 
not  in  a  very  satisfactory  condition  : — sa  yo  haitad  iti,  evam  upasitety 
artha// ;  yadi  vecHtu//  saka^at  ^yayasa/z  purushasya  sadbhave  tada 
svayam  badhyo  bhavatity  ajankya  tasmad  adhikapurushad  adhikam 
(a/7zadikat  B)  [vastu  dij-yopasitavyam  (!)  ity  aha,  yo  ^i  sma^  ^yayan 
iti ;  yadi  asmad  upasakat  yo^^dhika//  syat  tarhi  tasmad  adhikat,  om. 
BJ  d\si\/i  purva  ity  upasita;  tata/i  ^^yayaso^pi  ^yaya-upasane  svasya- 
dhikyat  badhako  nastity  artha/;.  The  commentary  would  thus  seem 
to  take  it  to  mean  that  by  showing  reverence  to  something  before, 
or  higher  than,  his  rival,  he  would  turn  aside  his  schemes. 

Z  2 


340  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 


14.  And  Priyavrata  Rauhiz/ayana,  knowing 
this  (truth),  once  spake  unto  the  blowing  wind, 
'  Thy  soul  ^  is  joy :  blow  thou  either  hither  or 
thither ! '  and  so,  indeed,  it  now  blows.  Wherefore, 
if  one  desire  to  invoke  any  blessing  from  the  gods, 
let  him  approach  them  with  this,  '  Your  soul  is 
joy, — my  wish  is  such  and  such  :  let  it  be  fulfilled 
unto  me  ! '  and  whatever  the  wish  he  entertains,  it 
will  be  fulfilled  to  him  ;  for,  assuredly,  he  who  knows 
this  attains  this  contentment,  this  successful  issue, 
this  joy,  this  soul. 

15.  This  Ya^^us  is  silent^,  indistinct;  for  the 
Ya^us  is  the  breath,  and  the  breath  is  of  silent 
(secret)  abode  ;  and  if  any  one  were  to  say  of  that 
(Adhvaryu)  who  pronounces  (the  Ya^us)  distinctly, 
'  He  has  uttered  distinctly  the  indistinct  deity  : 
his  breath  shall  fail  him!'  then  that  would,  indeed, 
come  to  pass. 

16.  And,  assuredly,  he  who  knows  the  indistinct 
(secret)  manifestation  of  this  (Ya^us)  becomes 
manifest  in  fame  and  glory.  Silently  the  Adhvaryu 
draws  the  cup  of  Soma  with  the  (muttered)  Ya^us, 
and,  when  drawn  and  deposited,  it  becomes  mani- 
fest;— silently  he  builds  the  fire-altar  with  the 
Ya/us,  and,  when  built  and  completed,  it  becomes 
manifest ; — silently  he  takes  out  (material  for)  the 
oblation  with  the  Ya^us,  and,  when  cooked  and 
ready  (for  offering),  it  becomes  manifest :  thus, 
whatever  he  performs  silently,  when  performed  and 
completed,  it  becomes  manifest.  And,  assuredly, 
he  who  thus  knows  this  secret  manifestation  of  this 


^  Or,  thine  own  self,  thy  nature — tavatma  svarupam.     Sayawa. 
^  That  is,  pronounced  in  an  undertone,  muttered. 


X    KAA^DA,    4    ADHYAVA,     I     BRAIIMA.VA,    3.  34 1 

(Yafiis)  becomes  manifest  in  fame,  and  glory,  and 
sanctity ;  and  quickly,  indeed,  he  becomes  known  : 
he  becomes  the  Ya^us  itself,  and  by  the  Ya^us 
people  call  him  '. 

Fourth  Adiiyaya.     First  Braiimajva. 

1.  When  the  gods  restored  the  relaxed  Pra^a- 
pati,  they  poured  him,  as  seed,  into  the  fire-pan 
(ukha)  as  the  womb,  for  the  fire-pan  is  a  womb. 
In  the  course  of  a  year  they  prepared  for  him  this 
food,  to  wit,  the  fire-altar  built  here,  and  enclosed 
it  in  a  body ;  and,  being  enclosed  in  a  body,  it 
became  the  body  itself;  whence  food,  when  enclosed 
in  a  body,  becomes  the  body  itself. 

2.  In  like  manner  does  the  Sacrificer  now  pour 
his  own  self  (or  body),  as  seed,  into  the  fire-pan 
as  the  womb,  for  the  fire-pan  is  a  womb.  In  the 
course  of  a  year  he  prepares  for  it  (his  selt)  this 
food,  to  wit,  the  fire-altar  here  built,  and  encloses 
it  in  a  body,  and,  being  enclosed  in  a  body,  it 
becomes  the  body  itself ;  whence  food,  when  enclosetl 
in  a  body,  becomes  the  body  itself 

3.  He  places  him  (the  Ukhya  Agni,  on  the  fire- 
altar)  with  'Vausha/^!'    for   'vauk'   is    he   (Agni), 


^  Ya^ushaivainam  a/('akshata  iti  ^'■;7at/7^;7eyayor  abhcdopaX-arewa 
tasya  vidusha  eva  yagu/i  tasya  vyavaharyatvam  bhavality  aitlia//. 
Sayawa. 

2  See  IX,  2,  3,  35,  where  il  was  slated  that  the  fire  should  be 
laid  down  with  the  Vasha/-call  ('  vausha/ ! ')  uttered  after  the  two 
verses,  Va^.  S.  XVII,  72.  73.  Here,  as  at  I,  7,  2,  21,  the  sacri- 
ficial call,  'vausha/'— for  '  vasha/,'  apparently  an  irregular  sul)junc- 
tive  aorist  of  '  vah  ' :  '  may  he  bear  (the  oblation  to  the  gods) ! ' — 
is  fancifully  explained  as  composed  of  'vauk'  (i.e.  vak,  speech), 
and  '  sha/,'  six. 


242  i-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAA^A. 


and  '  sha/'  (six)  '  is  this  six-layered  food :  having 
prepared  it,  he  offers  it  to  him  as  proportionate 
to  this  body,  for  food  which  is  proportionate  to  the 
body  satisfies,  and  does  not  injure  it  ;  but  when 
there  is  too  much,  it  does  injure  it,  and  when  there 
is  too  Uttle,  it  does  not  satisfy  it. 

4.  Now  that  Arka  ^  (flame)  is  this  very  fire  which 
they  bring  here ;  and  the  Kya  ^  is  this  his  food, 
to  wit,  the  fire-altar  built  here:  that  (combined) 
makes  the  Arkya  '  in  respect  of  the  Ya^us.  And 
the  Great  one  (mahan)  is  this  (Agni),  and  this  vrata  ^ 
(rite)  is  his  food  :  that  makes  the  Mahavrata 
(saman)  in  respect  of  the  Saman.  And  '  uk '  is 
this  (Agni),  and  '  tha '  his  food, — that  (combined) 
makes  the  Uktha  (^astra,  recitation)''  in  respect 
of  the  Rik.  Thus,  whilst  being  only  one,  this  is 
accounted  threefold. 

5.  Now  Indra  and  Agni  were  created  as  the 
Brahman  (priesthood)  and  the  Kshatra  (nobility)  : 
the  Brahman  was  Agni  and  the  Kshatra  Indra. 
When  created,  the  two  were  separate.  They  spake, 
'  Whilst  being  thus,  we  shall  be  unable  to  produce 
creatures  (people) :  let  us  both  become  one  form  ! ' 
The  two  became  one  form. 

6.  Now  those  two,  Indra  and  Agni,  are  the  same 
as  these  two,  to  wit,  the  gold  plate  and  the  (gold) 
man  ^ :   Indra  is  the  gold  plate,  and  Agni  the  man. 


'   See  X,  3,  4,  2  seq. 

^  That  is,  what  relates  to  the  Arka  (the  Fire,  or  Agni/iayana). 

^  That  is,  here,  the  Mahad  uktham,  or  Great  Recitation  of  the 
Mahavrata  day. 

*  Perhaps  with  the  impHed  sense  of  '  fast-food,'  '  fast-milk,'  the 
milk  taken  by  the  Sacrificer  during  the  initiation  as  his  only  food. 

^  For  the  gold  plate  worn  by  the  Sacrificer  whilst  carrying  about 


X  kXndA,    4  ADHYAYA,  I  BRAHMAA^A,  9.    "'«'• 


O^J 


They  are  made  of  gold  :  gold  means  light,  and 
Indra  and  Agni  are  the  light;  gold  means  immortal 
life,  and  Indra  and  Agni  mean  immortal  life. 

7.  It  is  these  two,  Indra  and  Agni.  that  they 
build  up.  Whatever  is  of  brick  that  is  Ag-ni  : 
whence  they  bake  that  (part)  by  fire,  and  all  that 
is  baked  by  fire  is  Agni.  And  what  filling  of  earth 
there  is  (in  the  altar)  that  is  Indra:  whence  they 
do  not  bake  that  (part)  by  fire,  lest  it  should  be 
Agni,  and  not  Indra.  Thus  it  is  these  two,  Indra 
and  Agni,  that  are  built  up. 

8.  And  the  two  become  that  one  form,  to  wit,  the 
fire  which  is  placed  on  the  built  (altar),  and  hence 
those  two,  by  means  of  that  form,  produce  creatures. 
Now  Agni,  indeed,  is  this  single  brick  \  and  into 
this  the  whole  Agni  passes :  this,  indeed,  is  the 
perfection  of  bricks, — it  is  that  one  syllable  (akshara) 
'  vauk,'  it  is  this  into  which  the  whole  Agni  passes, 
and  which  is  the  perfection  of  syllables. 

9.  It  is  this  that  the  v^/shi  saw  when  he  said, 
'  I  praise  what  hath  been  and  what  will  be,  the 
Great  Brahman,  the  one  Akshara, — the  manifold 
Brahman,  the  one  Akshara ;  for,  indeed,  all  the 
gods,  all  beings  pass  into  that  Akshara  (imperish- 


the  Ukhya  Agni,  and  ultimately  deposited  on  the  lotus-leaf  in  the 
centre  of  the  altar-siie  before  the  first  layer  is  laid  down,  see  VI, 
7,1,1  seq. ;  VII,  4,  i,  10  seq.  For  the  gold  man  placed  on  the 
gold  plate,  VII,  4,  r,  15  seq.  Whilst  the  gold  man  was  indeed 
identified  with  Agni-Pra^apaii,  as  well  as  with  the  Sacrificer,  the 
gold  plate  was  taken  throughout  as  representing  the  sun. 

*  According  to  Sayawa,  this  one  brick  is  the  syllable  ('  akshara,' 
which  also  means  '  the  imperishable,  indestructible ')  '  vauk '  con- 
tained in  the  '  Vausha/,'  uttered  when  the  sacred  fire  is  placed  on 
the  newly-built  altar. 


344  5ATAPATHA-BKAHMAiVA. 

able  element  ^) :  it  is  both  the  Brahman  and  the 
Kshatra ;  and  the  Brahman  is  Agni,  and  the 
Kshatra  Indra  ;  and  the  Vi^ve  Deva//  (all  the  gods) 
are  Indra  and  Agni.  But  the  Vii-ve  Deva/^  (the 
All-gods)  are  also  the  peasantry  :  hence  it  is  Priest- 
hood, Nobility,  and  Peasantry. 

lo.  And,  indeed,  ^yaparwa  Sayakayana,  know- 
ing this,  once  said,  '  If  this  my  sacrificial  performance 
were  complete,  my  own  race  would  become  the 
kings  (nobles),  Brahma;/as,  and  peasants  of  the 
Salvas  ;  but  even  by  that  much  of  my  work  which 
has  been  completed  -  my  race  will  surpass  the 
Salvas  in  both  ways ; ' — for  this  (Agni,  the  fire- 
altar),  indeed,  is  (social)  eminence  and  fame,  and  an 
eater  of  food  ^ 


'  Aksharam  avinajvara;/^  sarvagata;;/  va  brahma  sa/?'/('idanandai- 
karasam.     Sayawa. 

^  Or,  perhaps — but  since  so  much  of  my  work  has  been  com- 
pleted, my  race  will  thereby  surpass  the  Salvas.  Cf.  Delbriick, 
Altind.  Syntax,  p.  266. 

^  Sayawa  takes  this  as  intended  to  explain  the  '  in  both  ways '  of 
the  quotation,  viz.  in  regard  to  '  sn  '  (social  distinction)  on  the  one 
hand,  and  to  '  ya^as '  (fame)  and  food  (material  prosperity)  on  the 
other.  There  is,  however,  nothing  in  the  text  to  favour  any  such 
grouping  of  the  distinctive  objects  of  aspiration  associated  with  the 
three  classes  (var??atrayatmakatvam  upao-ivya  karmawa/;,  j-riya- 
j-o^nnadalaksha;/a?«  phalam.  Sayawa),  or  with  men  generally  (cf. 
Aitareyar.  I,  4,  2,  10).  Perhaps  it  means  both  in  an  intellectual 
and  material  point  of  view.  The  -S'yaparwas  seem  to  have  been 
a  rather  self-assertive  family  of  priests.  The  Aitareya  Brahmawa 
tells  the  following  story  about  them  (VII,  27): — Vii'vantara  Sau- 
shadmana,  setting  aside  the  ^Syaparwas,  got  up  a  sacrifice  without 
them.  The  ^yaparwas,  becoming  aware  of  this,  came  to  the  sacri- 
fice and  sat  them  down  inside  the  sacrificial  ground.  On  seeing 
them,  Vi.s-vanlara  said,  '  There  sit  those  doers  of  evil  deeds,  those 
speakers  of  foul  language,  the  6'yapar;/as :  turn  them  out ;  let  them 
not  sit  inside  my  sacrificial  ground  ! ' — '  So  be  it ! '  they  said,  and 


X     KANDA,    4    ADHYAYA,     I    BRAIIMAiVA,     12.       345 

11.  And    regarding    this,   Sa;z^ilya,    having    in- 
structed    Vamakakshaya;^a  \     said,     'Thou     wilt 
become    eminent,    famous,    and    an    eater    of    food 
(rich) ; '    and,  indeed,  he  who   knows   this  becomes, 
eminent,  famous,  and  an  eater  of  food, 

12.  And  this   Agni  is  no  other  than   Pra^apati. 


turned  them  out.  In  being  turned  out,  they  cried  aloud,  'At 
a  sacrifice  of  Cananie^aya,  son  of  Parikshit,  performed  ^vithout 
the  Kaj-yapas,  the  Asitamr/gas  from  amongst  the  Ka^yapas  won 
the  Soma-drink  from  the  Bhfitaviras  (who  were  officiating).  In 
them  they  had  heroic  men  on  their  side  :  what  hero  is  there  amongst 
us  who  will  win  that  Soma-drink?' — 'Here  is  that  hero  of  yours,' 
said  Rama  Margaveya.  Rama  Margaveya  was  a  ^'yaparwiya, 
learned  in  sacred  lore.  When  they  rose  to  leave,  he  said,  '  O  king, 
will  they  turn  out  of  the  sacrificial  ground  even  one  so  learned  as 
me  ? ' — '  Whoever  thou  art,  what  knowest  thou,  vile  Brahman  ? ' — 
'  When  the  gods  turned  Indra  away  because  he  had  outraged 
Tvash/r/'s  son  Vijvarupa,  and  laid  low  Vmra,  and  thrown  devo- 
tees before  the  jackals,  and  slain  the  Arurmaghas,  and  retorted  on 
Bn'haspati  (the  teacher  of  the  gods) — then  Indra  was  deprived  of 
the  Soma-cup ;  and  along  with  him  the  Kshatriyas  were  deprived 
of  the  Soma-cup.  By  stealing  the  Soma  from  Tvash/r/,  Indra 
obtained  a  share  in  the  Soma-cup,  but  to  this  day  the  Kshatriyas 
are  deprived  of  the  Soma-cup:  how  can  they  turn  out  from  the 
sacrificial  ground  one  who  knows  how  the  Kshatriya  race  can  be 
put  in  possession  of  the  Soma-cup  from  which  they  are  deprived?' 
— 'Knowest  thou  (how  to  procure)  that  drink,  O  Brahman?' — 
'  I  know  it  indeed.' — '  Tell  us  then,  O  Brahman  ? ' — '  To  thee, 
O  king,  I  will  tell  it,'  he  said.  Ultimately  the  Sya.pzvna.s  are 
reinstated  in  their  sacrificial  duties.  Cf.  R.  Roth,  Zur  Litteratur 
und  Geschichte  des  Weda,  p.  118.  At  VI,  2,  i,  39,  6}'apar«a 
Sayakayana  was  stated  to  have  been  the  last  who  was  in  the  habit 
of  immolating  five  victims  instead  of  two,  as  became  afterwards  the 
custom. 

'  In  the  succession  of  teachers  of  the  doctrine  of  the  fire-altar, 
given  at  the  end  of  the  present  Ka?ida,  Vamakakshayaz/a  is  said 
to  have  received  his  instruction  from  Vatsya,  and  the  latter  from 
iS'aw/ilya,  who,  in  his  turn,  received  it  from  Kuxri.  Cf.  Weber, 
Ind.  Stud.  I,  p.  259. 


346  5'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

The  gods,  having  restored  this  Agni-Pra^dpati, 
in  the  course  of  a  year  prepared  this  food  for  him. 
to  wit,  this  Mahavratiya  cup  of  Soma. 

13.  The  Adhvaryu  draws  it  by  means  of  a  cup, 
and  inasmuch  as  he  draws  (grah)  it  it  is  (called) 
a  draught  (graha,  cup  of  Soma).  The  Udgatr? 
(chanter),  by  the  Mahavrata  (saman),  puts  flavour 
(vital  sap)  into  it ;  and  the  Mahavrata  (saman) 
being  (composed  of)  all  those  (five)  samans,  he  thus 
puts  flavour  into  it  by  means  of  all  samans  (hymn- 
tunes).  The  Hot;V  puts  flavour  into  it  by  means 
of  the  Great  Recitation  ;  and  the  Great  Recitation 
being  (composed  of)  all  those  7?2k-verses  :  he  thus 
puts  flavour  into  it  by  all  the  i?/k-verses. 

14.  And  when  they  chant  the  hymn,  and  he  (the 
HotT'z)  afterwards  recites  (the  i'astra)  \  he  (the 
Adhvaryu)  offers  that  (cup  of  Soma)  to  him  (Agni- 
Pra^apati)  as  the  Vasha/-call  is  uttered.  Now 
'  vauk '  is  this  (Agni),  and  '  sha/'  this  sixfold  food  - : 
having  prepared  it,  he  offers  it  to  him  as  pro- 
portionate to  his  body ;  for  food  which  is  pro- 
portionate to  the  body  satisfies,  and  does  not 
injure  it ;  but  when  there  is  too  much,  it  does 
injure  it,  and  when  there  is  too  little,  it  does  not 
satisfy  it. 

15.  Now  that  Arka  (flame)   is  this  very  fire-altar 


^  Viz.  the  jNIahad  uktham  (see  p.  no,  note  3),  preceded  by  the 
chanting  of  the  Mahavrata-saman  (see  p.  382,  note  5). 

2  That  is,  according  as  it  is  flavoured  by  the  six  different 
'rasas'  (flavours  or  tastes) — sweet  (madhura),  sour  (amla),  salt 
(lava«a),  pungent  (kaAika),  bitter  (tikta),  and  astringent  (kashaya). 
Thus  according  to  Sayawa ;  but  see  also  paragraph  3,  where  the 
sixfold  nature  of  the  food  is  identified  with  the  six-layered  altar. 
Perhaps  both  explanations  are  intended  to  apply. 


X    KAiVDA,    4    ADIIYAVA,     I     BRAHMAiVA,     1 8.        347 

built  here  ;  and  the  Kya  is  this  his  food,  to  wit,  the 
Mahavrati)a-graha  :  that  (combined)  makes  the 
Arkya  in  respect  of  the  Ya^us.  And  the  Great 
one  (mahan)  is  this  (Agni),  and  this  rite  (vrata) 
is  his  food  :  that  makes  the  Mahavrata  in  respect 
of  the  Saman.  And  '  uk '  is  this  (Agni),  and  '  tha ' 
his  food  :  that  makes  the  (Mahad)  Uktha  in  respect 
of  the  Jvik.  Thus,  whilst  being  only  one,  this  is 
accounted  threefold. 

16.  And  this  Agni  is  Pra^apati,  the  year  M  the 
Savitra  (oblations)  are  one  half  thereof,  and  the 
Vai^va-karma//a  (oblations)  -  the  (other)  half ;  the 
Savitra  are  eight  digits  (kala  ^)  thereof,  and  the 
Vaii-vakarma;^a  (the  other)  eight ;  and  that  which 
is  performed  between  them  is  the  seventeenfold 
Pra^apati.  Now  what  a  digit  is  to  men  that 
a   syllable   (akshara)   is  to  the  gods. 

17.  And  '  loma  (hair)'  is  two  syllables.  '  tvak  ^ 
(skin)  '  two,  '  asr/k  (blood)  '  tw^o,  '  medas  (fat) '  two, 
'  mawsam  (flesh) '  two,  '  snava  (sinew)  '  two,  '  asthi 
(bone) '  two,  '  ma^^a  (marrow)  ^ '  two, — that  makes 
sixteen  digits  ;  and  the  vital  air  which  circulates 
therein,  is  the  seventeenfold  Pra^apati. 

18.  These  sixteen  digits  convey  the  food  to  that 
vital  air ;  and  when  they  take  to  conveying  no  food 
to  it,  then  it  consumes  them  and  departs  (from  the 
body) :    hence   he   who  is   hungry  here,  feels   very 


^  Or,  perhaps,  this  Pra^'-apali-Agui  is  the  year. 

'^  For  these  two  sets  of  formulas  and  oblations,  see  IX,  5,  i,  43 
and  note. 

'  A  '  kala'  is  the  sixteenth  part  of  the  moon's  diameter,  and  then 
a  sixteenth  part  generally. 

*  Pronounce  '  tu-ak.' 

■^  For  five  of  these  parts  of  the  body,  see  X,  1,3,  4. 


348  -S-ATAPATHA-BRAHMA.VA. 

restless,  consumed  as  he  is  by  his  vital  airs  ;  and 
hence  he  who  suffers  from  fever  becomes  very  thin, 
for  he  is  consumed  by  his  vital  airs. 

19.  Now  for  that  seventeenfold  Pra^apati  they 
prepared  this  seventeenfold  food,  the  Soma-sacrifice  : 
those  sixteen  digits  of  his  are  these  sixteen  officiating 
priests, — one  should  not,  therefore,  take  a  seventeenth 
priest  ^  lest  one  should  do  what  is  excessive  ; — and 
what  vital  sap  there  is  here — the  oblations  that 
are  offered — that  is  the  seventeenfold  food. 

20.  And  when  they  chant  the  hymn,  and  when  he 
(the  Hotri)  afterwards  recites  {the  ^astra),  he  (the 
Adhvaryu)  offers  to  him  that  food  as  the  Vasha^ 
call  is  uttered.  Now  '  vauk  '  is  this  (Agni),  and 
'  sha^ '  this  sixfold  food :  having  prepared  it,  he 
offers  it  to  him  as  proportionate  to  his  body  ;  for 
food  which  is  proportionate  to  the  body  satisfies, 
and  does  not  injure  it ;  but  when  there  is  too  much 
it  does  injure  it,  and  when  there  is  too  little,  it  does 
not  satisfy  it. 

21.  Now  that  Arka  (flame)  is  this  very  fire-altar 
built  here  ;  and  the  Kya  is  this  his  food,  to  wit,  the 
Soma-sacrifice  :  that  (combined)  makes  the  Arkya 
in  respect  of  the  Ya^us.  And  the  Great  one  (ma- 
han)  is  this  (Agni),  and  this  rite  (vrata)  is  his  food  : 
that  makes  the  Mahavrata  in  respect  of  the  Saman, 
And  '  uk  '  is  this  (Agni),  and  '  tha  '  his  food  :  that 
makes  the  (Mahad)  Uktha  in  respect  of  the  Rik. 
Thus,  whilst  being  only  one,  this  is  accounted  three- 
fold.    With  this  food  he  went  upwards  ;  and  he  who 

^  This  prohibition  is  probably  directed  against  the  Kaushitakins, 
who  recognise  a  seventeenth  officiating  priest,  the  Sadasya,  who 
seems  to  have  taken  no  other  part  in  the  sacrificial  performance 
except  sitting  in  the  Sadas  as  the  permanent  custodian  thereof. 


X    KAiVZiA,    4    ADHYAYA,    2    BRAHMAA^A,    2.         349 

went  upwards  is  yonder  sun,  and  that  food  wherewith 
he  went  up  is  that  moon. 

22.  He  who  shines  yonder  is  indeed  that  Arka 
(flame),  and  that  moon  is  his  food,  the  Kya  :  tliat 
(combined)  makes  the  Arkya  in  respect  of  the 
Ya^^us.  And  the  Great  one  (mahan)  is  this  (Agni), 
and  this  rite  (vrata)  is  his  food  :  that  makes  the 
Mahavrata  in  respect  of  the  Saman.  And  '  uk ' 
is  this  (Agni),  and  '  tha  '  his  food  :  that  makes  the 
(Mahad)  Uktha  in  respect  of  the/?/k.  Thus,  whilst 
being  only  one,  this  is  accounted  threefold.  Thus 
much  as  to  the  deity. 

23.  Now  as  to  the  body.  The  Arka  (flame), 
doubtless,  is  the  breath  (vital  air),  and  the  Kya  is 
its  food  :  that  makes  the  Arkya  in  respect  of  the 
Yacrus.  And  the  Great  one  (mahan)  is  this  (Agni). 
and  this  rite  (vrata)  is  his  food  :  that  makes  the 
Mahavrata  in  respect  of  the  Saman.  And  '  uk '  is 
this  (Agni),  and  '  tha '  his  food  :  that  makes  the 
(Mahad)  Uktha  in  respect  of  theT^/k.  Thus,  whilst 
being  only  one,  this  is  accounted  threefold.  And, 
indeed,  that  (Agni)  is  that  (sun)  as  to  the  deity,  and 
this  (breath)  as  to  the  body. 

Second   Brahmaa^a. 

1.  Verily,  Pra^apati,  the  year,  is  Agni,  and  King 
Soma,  the  moon.  He  himself,  indeed,  proclaimed 
(taught)  his  own  self  to  Ya^^;7ava/('as  Ra^astam- 
bayana,  saying,  'As  many  lights  as  there  are  of 
mine,  so  many  are   my  bricks.' 

2.  Now  in  this  Pra^^apati,  the  year,  there  are 
seven  hundred  and  twenty  days  and  nights,  his 
lights,  (being)  those  bricks ;  three  hundred  and  sixty 


350  .S-ATAPATHA-KRAHMAiVA. 

enclosing-stones  \  and  three  hundred  and  sixty  bricks 
with  (special)  formulas.  This  Pra;cr^pati,  the  year, 
has  created  all  existing  things,  both  what  breathes 
and  the  breathless,  both  gods  and  men.  Having 
created  all  existing  things,  he  felt  like  one  emptied 
out,  and  was  afraid  of  death. 

3.  He  bethought  himself,  '  How  can  I  get  these 
beings  back  into  my  body  ?  how  can  I  put  them 
back  into  my  body  ?  how  can  I  be  again  the  body 
of  all  these  beings  ?  ' 

4.  He  divided  his  body  into  two  ;  there  were 
three  hundred  and  sixty  bricks  in  the  one,  and 
as  many  in  the  other :  he  did  not  succeed  ^. 

5.  He  made  himself  three  bodies, — in  each  of 
them  there  were  three  eighties  of  bricks  :  he  did  not 
succeed. 

6.  He  made  himself  four  bodies  of  a  hundred  and 
eighty  bricks  each  :  he  did  not  succeed. 

7.  He  made  himself  five  bodies, — in  each  of 
them  there  were  a  hundred  and  forty-four  bricks  : 
he  did  not  succeed. 

8.  He  made  himself  six  bodies  of  a  hundred  and 
twenty  bricks  each  :  he  did  not  succeed.  He  did 
not  develop  himself  sevenfold  ■'. 

9.  He  made  himself  eight  bodies  of  ninety  bricks 
each  :  he  did  not  succeed. 

10.  He  made  himself  nine  bodies  of  eighty  bricks 
each  :   he  did  not  succeed. 


^  See  X,  4,  2,  27  with  note. 

2  Navyapnot,  intrans.,  'he  did  not  attain  (his  object),'  cf.  vyapti, 
in  the  sense  of  'success'; — (svayaw  tesham  atma  bhavitum) 
asamartho:>^bhavat.     Saya^/a. 

^  Or,  did  not  divide  sevenfold,  na  saptadha  vyabhavat, — saptadha- 
vibhaga?;i  na  kn'tavan.     Sayawa. 


X    KANDA,    4    ADHYAYA,    2    BRAIIMA.VA,     iS.        35 1 

II.  He  made  himself  ten  bodies  of  seventy-two 
bricks  each  :  he  did  not  succeed.  He  did  not 
develop  elevenfold. 

I  2.  He  made  himself  twelve  bodies  of  sixty  bricks 
each  :  he  did  not  succeed.  He  did  not  develop 
either  thirteenfold  or  fourteenfold. 

13.  He  made  himself  fifteen  bodies  of  forty-eight 
bricks  each  :  he  did  not  succeed. 

14.  He  made  himself  sixteen  bodies  of  forty-five 
bricks  each :  he  did  not  succeed.  He  did  not 
develop  seventeenfold. 

15.  He  made  himself  eighteen  bodies  offorty  bricks 
each  :  he  did  not  succeed.  He  did  not  develop 
nineteenfold. 

16.  He  made  himself  twenty  bodies  of  thirty-six 
bricks  each :  he  did  not  succeed.  He  did  not 
develop  either  twenty-one-fold,  or  twenty-two-fold, 
or  twenty-three-fold. 

17.  He  made  himself  twenty-four  bodies  of  thirty 
bricks  each.  There  he  stopped,  at  the  fifteenth  ; 
and  because  he  stopped  at  the  fifteenth  arrangement ' 
there  are  fifteen  forms  of  the  waxing,  and  fifteen  of 
the  waning  (moon). 

18.  And  because  he  made  himself  twenty-four 
bodies,  therefore  the  year  consists  of  twenty-four 
half-months.  With  these  twenty-four  bodies  of 
thirty  bricks  each  he  had  not  developed  (sufficiently). 
He  saw  the  fifteen  parts  of  the  day,  the  muhurtas  -, 


'  Literally,  shifting  (about  of  the  bricks  of  the  al.ar),  de- 
velopment. 

'^  The  day  and  night  consists  of  thirty  muhiirtas,  a  muhurta 
being  thus  equal  to  about  forty-eight  minutes  or  four-fifths  of  an 
hour. 


352  ^ATAPATIIA-BRAHMAA^A. 


as  forms  for  his  body,  as  space-fillers  (Lokamp;V;^as^), 
as  well  as  fifteen  of  the  night ;  and  inasmuch  as 
they  straightway  (muhu)  save  (trai),  they  are  (called) 
'  muhurta//  ' ;  and  inasmuch  as,  whilst  being  small, 
they  fill  (pur)  these  worlds  {or  spaces,  '  loka  ')  they 
are  (called)  '  lokamprzV^a//.' 

1 9.  That  one  (the  sun)  bakes  everything  here,  by 
means  of  the  days  and  nights,  the  half-moons,  the 
months,  the  seasons,  and  the  year ;  and  this  (Agnl, 
the  fire)  bakes  what  is  baked  by  that  one  :  '  A  baker 
of  the  baked  (he  is),'  said  Bharadva^a  of  Agni ; 
'  for  he  bakes  what  has  been  baked  by  that  (sun),' 

20.  In  the  year  these  (muhurtas)  amounted  to  ten 
thousand  and  eight  hundred  :  he  stopped  at  the 
ten  thousand  and  eight  hundred. 

21.  He  then  looked  round  over  all  existing  things, 
and  beheld  all  existing  things  in  the  threefold 
lore  (the  Veda),  for  therein  is  the  body  of  all  metres, 
of  all  stomas,  of  all  vital  airs,  and  of  all  the  gods  : 
this,  indeed,  exists,  for  it  is  immortal,  and  what  is 
immortal  exists  ;  and  this  (contains  also)  that  which 
is  mortal. 

22.  Pra^apati  bethought  himself,  '  Truly,  all 
existing  things  are  in  the  threefold  lore  :  well,  then, 
I  will  construct  for  myself  a  body  so  as  to  contain 
the  whole  threefold  lore.' 

23.  He  arranged  the  7?/k-verses  into  twelve 
thousand   of  Br/hatis  ^  for  of  that   extent  are   the 


1  The  Lokampnwa  bricks  contained  in  the  whole  fire-altar 
amount  to  as  many  as  there  are  muhurtas  in  the  year,  viz.  10,800 ; 
see  X,  4,  3,  20. 

-  Tlie  Br/hati  verse,  consisting  of  36  syllables,  this  calculation 
makes  the  hymns  of  the  i?/g-veda  to  consist  of  36  x  12,000  = 
432,000  syllables. 


X    KANDA,    4    ADIIYAYA,    2    BRAIIMAiVA,    26.         353 

verses  created  by  Pra^apati.  At  the  thirtieth  arrange- 
ment they  came  to  an  end  in  the  Paiiktis ;  and 
because  it  was  at  the  thirtieth  arrangement  that  they 
came  to  an  end,  there  are  thirty  nights  in  the  month  ; 
and  because  it  was  in  the  Pahktis,  therefore  Pra^apati 
is  '  pahkta  '  (fivefold)  ^  There  are  one  hundred-and- 
eiofht  hundred  -  Paiiktis. 

24.  He  then  arranged  the  two  other  Vedas  into 
twelve  thousand  Br/hatis, — eight  (thousand)  of 
the  Ya^us  (formulas),  and  four  of  the  Saman  (hymns) 
— for  of  that  extent  is  what  was  created  by  Pra^apati 
in  these  two  Vedas.  At  the  thirtieth  arrangement 
these  two  came  to  an  end  in  the  Pahktis ;  and 
because  it  was  at  the  thirtieth  arranorement  that 
they  came  to  an  end,  there  are  thirty  nights  in  the 
month  ;  and  because  it  was  in  the  Pahktis,  therefore 
Prac^apati  is  '  pahkta.'  There  were  one  hundred- 
and-eis3^ht  hundred  -  Pahktis. 

25.  All  the  three  Vedas  amounted  to  ten  thousand 
eight  hundred  eighties  (of  syllables)  ^ ;  muhurta  by 
muhurta  he  gained  a  fourscore  (of  syllables),  and 
muhurta  by  muhurta  a  fourscore  was  completed  •*. 

26.  Into  these  three  worlds,  (in  the  form  of)  the 

*  The  Pahkti  consists  of  five  padas  (feet)  of  eight  syllables  each. 
^  That  is  to  say,  10,800  Pahktis,  which,  as  the  Pankti  verse  has 

40  syllables,  again  amount  to  432,000  syllables. 

^  The  three  Vedas,  according  to  the  calculations  in  paragraphs 
23  and  24,  contain  2x432,000  =  864,000  syllables,  which  is 
equal  to  80  X  10,800.  On  the  predilection  to  calculate  by  four- 
scores, see  p.  112,  note  i. 

*  That  is,  within  the  year,  for  the  year  has  360x30  =  10,800 
muhfirlas,  wliich  is  just  the  amount  of  eighties  of  which  the  three 
Vedas  were  said  to  consist.  I  do  not  see  how  any  division  of  the 
'muhiirta'  itself  into  eighty  parts  (as  supposed  by  Professor  Weber, 
Ind.  Streifen,  I,  p.  92,  note  i)  can  be  implied  here. 

[43]  A  a 


354  i'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

fire-pan  ^  he  (Pra^apati)  poured,  as  seed  into  the 
womb,  his  own  self  made  up  of  the  metres,  stomas, 
vital  airs,  and  deities.  In  the  course  of  a  half-moon 
the  first  body  was  made  up,  in  a  further  (half-moon) 
the  next  (body),  in  a  further  one  the  next, — in  a  year 
he  is  made  up  whole  and  complete. 

27.  Whenever  he  laid  down  an  enclosing-stone  ^ 
he  laid  down  a  night,  and  along  with  that  fifteen 
muhurtas,  and  along  with  the  muhurtas  fifteen 
eighties  (of  syllables  of  the  sacred  texts)  ^  And 
whenever  he  laid  down  a  brick  with  a  formula  (ya- 
^ushmati),  he  laid  down  a  day  ^,  and  along  with  that 
fifteen  muhurtas,  and  along  with  the  muhurtas  fifteen 
eighties  (of  syllables).  In  this  manner  he  put  this 
threefold  lore  into  his  own  self,  and  made  it  his 
own  ;  and  in  this  very  (performance)  he  became  the 
body  of  all  existing  things,  (a  body)  composed  of 
the  metres,  stomas,  vital  airs,  and  deities ;  and 
having  become  composed  of  all  that,  he  ascended 
upwards  ;  and  he  who  thus  ascended  is  that  moon 
yonder. 

28.  He  who  shines  yonder  (the  sun)  is  his  founda- 

^  On  the  construction  of  the  Ukha,  as  representing  the  universe, 
see  VI,  5,  2  seq. 

^  The  number  of '  pari^rits '  by  which  the  great  altar  is  enclosed 
is  only  261  ;  but  to  these  are  usually  added  those  of  the  other 
brick-built  hearths,  viz.  the  Garhapatya  (21)  and  the  eight  Dhish- 
wyas  (78), — the  whole  amounting  to  360  enclosing-stones,  or  one  for 
each  day  (or  night)  in  the  year. 

"  According  to  paragraph  25,  a  fourscore  of  syllables  was  com- 
pleted in  each  muhuria;  and  day  and  night  consist  of  fifteen 
muhiartas  each. 

*  See  IX,  4,  3,  6,  where  the  number  of  Ya^ushmati  bricks  is 
said  to  be  equal  to  that  of  the  pari^-rits,  or  enclosing-stones— with, 
however,  35  (36)  added  for  the  intercalary  month,  hence  altogether 
395  (396);  cf.  X,  4,  3,  14-19. 


X    KA;VDA,    4    ADHYAYA,    2    BRAHMAiVA,    3 1.        355 

tion,  (for)  over  him  he  was  built  up  \  on  him  he  was 
built  up  :  from  out  of  his  own  self  he  thus  fashioned 
him,  from  out  of  his  own  self  he  generated  him. 

29.  Now  when  he  (the  Sacrificer),  being  about  to 
build  an  altar,  undergoes  the  initiation-rite, — even 
as  Pra^apati  poured  his  own  self,  as  seed,  into  the 
fire-pan  as  the  womb, — so  does  he  pour  into  the  fire- 
pan, as  seed  into  the  womb,  his  own  self  composed 
of  the  metres,  stomas,  vital  airs,  and  deities.  In  the 
course  of  a  half-moon,  his  first  body  is  made  up,  in 
a  further  (half-moon)  the  next  (body),  in  a  further 
one  the  next, — in  a  year  he  is  made  up  whole  and 
complete. 

30.  And  whenever  he  lays  down  an  enclosing- 
stone,  he  lays  down  a  night,  and  along  with  that 
fifteen  muhurtas,  and  along  with  the  muhurtas 
fifteen  eighties  (of  syllables).  And  whenever  he  lays 
down  a  Ya^ushmati  (brick),  he  lays  down  a  day,  and 
along  with  that  fifteen  muhurtas,  and  along  with  the 
muhurtas  fifteen  eighties  (of  syllables  of  the  sacred 
texts).  In  this  manner  he  puts  this  threefold  lore 
into  his  own  self,  and  makes  it  his  own  ;  and  in  this 
very  (performance)  he  becomes  the  body  of  all  exist- 
ing things,  (a  body)  composed  of  the  metres,  stomas, 
vital  airs,  and  deities  ;  and  having  become  composed 
of  all  that,  he  ascends  upwards. 

31.  And  he  who  shines  yonder  is  his  foundation, 
for  over  him  he  is  built  up,  on  him  he  is  built  up  : 
from  out  of  his  own  self  he  thus  fashions  him,  from 
out  of  his  own  self  he  generates  him.     And  when 

'  Viz.  inasmuch  as  the  round  gold  plate,  representing  the  sun, 
was  laid  down  in  the  centre  of  the  altar-site,  before  the  first  layer 
was  built.     Sayana. 

A  a  2 


356  DATAPATH  A-BRAHMAiVA. 

he  who  knows  this  departs  from  this  world,  then  he 
passes  into  that  body  composed  of  the  metres, 
stomas,  vital  airs,  and  deities  ;  and  verily  having 
become  composed  of  all  that,  he  who,  knowing  this, 
performs  this  sacrificial  work,  or  he  who  even  knows 
it,  ascends  upwards. 

Third  Brahmatva. 

1.  The  Year,  doubtless,  is  the  same  as  Death, 
for  he^  it  is  who,  by  means  of  day  and  night,  destroys 
the  life  of  mortal  beings,  and  then  they  die  :  there- 
fore the  Year  is  the  same  as  Death  ;  and  whosoever 
knows  this  Year  (to  be)  Death,  his  life  that  (year) 
does  not  destroy,  by  day  and  night,  before  old  age, 
and  he  attains  his  full  (extent  of)  life. 

2.  And  he,  indeed,  is  the  Ender,  for  it  is  he  who, 
by  day  and  night,  reaches  the  end  of  the  life  of 
mortals,  and  then  they  die  :  therefore  he  is  the 
Ender,  and  whosoever  knows  this  Year,  Death,  the 
Ender,  the  end  of  his  life  that  (Year)  does  not  reach, 
by  day  and  night,  before  old  age,  and  he  attains  his 
full  (extent  of)  life. 

3.  The  gods  were  afraid  of  this  Pra^apati,  the 
Year,  Death,  the  Ender,  lest  he,  by  day  and  night, 
should  reach  the  end  of  their  life. 

4.  They  performed  these  sacrificial  rites — the 
Agnihotra,  the  New  and  Full-moon  sacrifices,  the 
Seasonal  offerings,  the  animal  sacrifice,  and  the 
Soma-sacrifice  :  by  offering  these  sacrifices  they  did 
not  attain  immortality. 

5.  They  also   built  a  fire-altar, — they  laid   down 

^  Father  Time,  Pra^apati. 


X    KAiVDA,    4    ADHYAYA,    3    BRAHMAiVA,    lO.        357 


unlimited  enclosing-stones,  unlimited  Ya^ushmati 
(bricks),  unlimited  Lokampr/;^a  (bricks),  even  as 
some  lay  them  down  to  this  day,  saying,  '  The  gods 
did  so.'     They  did  not  attain  immortality. 

6.  They  went  on  praising  and  toiling,  striving  to 
win  imm-ortality.  Pra^apati  then  spake  unto  them, 
*  Ye  do  not  lay  down  (put  on  me)  all  my  forms ; 
but  ye  either  make  (me)  too  large  or  leave  (me)  de- 
fective :  therefore  ye  do  not  become  immortal.' 

7.  They  spake,  'Tell  thou  us  thyself,  then,  in 
what  manner  we  may  lay  down  all  thy  forms  ! ' 

8.  He  spake,  '  Lay  ye  down  three  hundred  and 
sixty  enclosing-stones,  three  hundred  and  sixty 
Ya<^shmati  (bricks),  and  thirty-six  thereunto  ;  and 
of  Lokamprma  (bricks)  lay  ye  down  ten  thousand 
and  eight  hundred ;  and  ye  will  be  laying  down 
all  my  forms,  and  will  become  immortal.'  And  the 
gods  laid  down  accordingly,  and  thereafter  became 
immortal. 

9.  Death  spake  unto  the  gods,  '  Surely,  on  this 
wise  all  men  will  become  immortal,  and  what  share 
will  then  be  mine?'  They  spake,  'Henceforward 
no  one  shall  be  immortal  with  the  body  :  only  when 
thou  shalt  have  taken  that  (body)  as  thy  share,  he 
who  is  to  become  immortal  either  through  know- 
ledge, or  through  holy  work,  shall  become  immortal 
after  separating  from  the  body.'  Now  when  they 
said,  '  either  through  knowledge  or  through  holy 
work,'  it  is  this  fire-altar  that  is  the  knowledge,  and 
this  fire-altar  that  is  the  holy  work. 

10.  And  they  who  so  know  this,  or  they  who  do 
this  holy  work,  come  to  life  again  when  they  have 
died,  and,  coming  to  life,  they  come  to  immortal  life. 
But  they  who  do  not  know  this,  or  do  not  do  this 


1 


58  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 


holy  work,  come  to  life  again  when  they  die,  and 
they  become  the  food  of  him  (Death)  time  after  time. 

11.  But  when  he  builds  the  fire-altar,  he  thereby 
gains  Agni,  Pra/apati,  the  Year,  Death,  the  Ender, 
whom  the  gods  gained  ;  it  is  him  he  lays  down, 
even  as  the  gods  thus  laid  him  down. 

12.  By  the  enclosing-stones  he  gains  his  nights; 
by  the  Ya^ushmati  (bricks)  his  days,  half-moons, 
months,  and  seasons ;  and  by  the  Lokampr^V/as 
the  muhurtas  (hours). 

13.  Thus  the  enclosing-stones,  supplying  the  place 
of  nights,  are  made  the  (means  of)  gaining  the 
nights,  they  are  the  counterpart  of  the  nights:  there 
are  three  hundred  and  sixty  of  them,  for  there  are 
three  hundred  and  sixty  nights  in  the  year.  Of  these, 
he  lays  twenty-one  round  the  Garhapatya,  seventy- 
eight  round  the  Dhish;/ya  hearths,  and  two  hundred 
and  sixty-one  round  the  Ahavaniya. 

14.  Then  the  Ya^ushmati  (bricks  with  special 
formulas): — the  grass-bunch,  the  (four)  clod-bricks, 
the  lotus-leaf,  the  gold  plate  and  man,  the  two  spoons, 
the  naturally-perforated  (brick),  the  dtarva-brick,  the 
(one)  dviya^us,  two  reta/^si/^,  a  vii'va^yotis,  two 
seasonal  ones,  an  ashad/ia,  the  tortoise,  the  mortar 
and  pestle,  the  fire-pan,  the  five  victims'  heads, 
fifteen  apasyas,  five  /^-^andasyas,  fifty  pra.na.hhr its — 
these  ninety-eight  are  (in)  the  first  layer. 

15.  Then  the  second  (layer): — five  ai"vinis,  two 
seasonal  ones,  five  vai^vadevis,  five  prauahhrits,  five 
apasyas,  nineteen  vayasyas — these  forty-one  are 
(in)  the  second  layer. 

16.  Then  the  third  (layer) : — the  naturally-per- 
forated one,  five  regional  ones,  a  vi^va^yotis,  four 
seasonal  ones,  ten  pra;^abhr/tSj  thirty-six  /-/^andasyas, 


X    KANDA,    4    ADIIYAYA,    3    BRAHMAA^A,     1 9.       359 


fourteen  valakhilyas — these  seventy-one  are  (in)  the 
third  layer. 

17.  Then  the  fourth  (layer)  :— first  eighteen,  then 
twelve,  then  seventeen — these  forty-seven  are  (in) 
the  fourth  layer. 

1 8.  Then  the  fifth  (layer) : — five  asapatnas,  forty 
vira^s,  twenty-nine  stomabhagas,  five  nakasads,  five 
pa;'2/{'a/{'tj<^as,  thirty-one  /'//andasyas,  eight  (of)  the 
Garhapatya  hearth,  eight  (of)  the  Puna5-/('iti,  two 
seasonal  ones,  a  vi^va^yotis,  a  vikar;^i,  a  naturally- 
perforated  one,  the  variegated  stone,  the  fire  which 
is  placed  on  the  altar — these  one  hundred  and 
thirty-eight  are  (in)  the  fifth  layer. 

19.  All  these  make  three  hundred  and  ninety-five. 
Of  these,  three  hundred  and  sixty,  supplying  the 
place  of  days,  are  made  the  (means  of)  gaining  the 
days,  they  are  the  counterpart  of  the  days :  There 
are  three  hundred  and  sixty  of  them,  for  there  are 
three  hundred  and  sixty  days  in  the  year.  And  for 
the  thirty-six  (additional  days)  which  there  are  ^  the 
filling  of  earth  (counts  as)  the  thirty-sixth ;  and 
twenty-four  thereof,  supplying  the  place  of  half- 
moons,  are  made  the  (means  of)  gaining  the  half- 
moons,  they  are  the  counterpart  of  the  half-moons. 
And  the  (remaining)  twelve,  supplying  the  place  of 
months,  are  made  the  (means  of)  gaining  the  months, 
they  are  the  counterpart  of  the  months.  And,  lest 
the  seasons  should  be  wanting,  these  (twelve  bricks), 
by  two  and  two  (taken)  together,  supply  the  place 
of  seasons. 


'  Namely,  in  an  intercalary  month.  The  layers  of  loose  soil 
have  to  be  counted  in  for  the  reason  that  only  35  ya^ushmatis 
remain  after  taking  away  the  360. 


360  5'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

20.  And  as  to  the  Lokamp7^/;/a  (space-filling 
bricks),  supplying  the  place  of  muhtartas  (hours),  they 
are  made  the  (means)  of  gaining  the  muhurtas,  they 
are  the  counterpart  of  the  muhurtas :  there  are  ten 
thousand  and  eight  hundred  of  them,  for  so  many 
muhurtas  there  are  in  the  year.  Of  these,  he  lays 
down  twenty-one  in  the  Garhapatya  (altar),  seventy- 
eight  in  the   Dhish;/ya-hearths,  and   the  others   in 

A 

the  Ahavaniya.  So  many,  indeed,  are  the  (different) 
forms  of  the  year :  it  is  these  that  are  here  secured 
for  him  (Pra^apati,  the  Year),  and  are  put  on  him. 

21.  Now,  some  wish  to  o-et  this  total  amount^  in 
the  Ahavaniya  itself,  arguing,  '  Those  are  different 
brick-built  fire-altars  :  why  should  we  here  (in  the 
Ahavaniya  altar)  take  into  account  those  laid  down 
there  (in  the  Garhapatya  and  Dhish;2yas)  ? '  But  let 
him  not  do  so.  There  are,  indeed,  ten  of  these 
fire-altars  he  builds — eight  Dhish^^yas,  the  Aha- 
vaniya and  the  Garhapatya — whence  they  say,  '  Agni 
is  Vira^  (wide  shining  or  ruling),'  for  the  Vira^  (metre) 
consists  of  ten  syllables  :  but,  surely,  all  these  (altars 
and  hearths)  are  looked  upon  as  only  one,  as  Agni ; 
for  it  is  merely  forms  of  him  that  they  all  are, — even 
as  the  days  and  nights,  the  half-moons,  the  months, 
and  the  seasons  (are  forms)  of  the  year,  so  are  they 
all  forms  of  him  (Agni). 

22.  And,  assuredly,  they  who  do  this  put  those 
forms  of  his  ^  outside  of  him,  and  produce  confusion 
between  the  better  and  the  worse ;  they  make  the 
peasantry  equal  and  refractory  to  the  nobility. 
Surely,  on  the  Agnidhriya  he  places  the  variegated 

.   ^  Viz.  of  10,800  Lokampr/7/as. 
^  Viz.  the  Garhapatya  and  Dhish7?ya  hearths. 


X    KANDA,    4    ADIIYAYA,    4    BRAIlMAiVA,    3.         36 1 


Stone  \  and  that  he  takes  into  account :  why,  then, 
taking  that  into  account,  should  he  not  take  others 
into  account  ?  That  (altar)  by  which  they  ward  off 
Nirr/ti^  evil,  is  the  eleventh. 

23.  As  to  this  they  say,  'Why,  then,  do  they  not 
take  into  account  here  those  (of  Nirmi's  altar)?' 
Because  he  makes  no  offering  on  them,  for  it  is  by 
offering  that  a  brick  becomes  whole  and  complete. 

24.  As  to  this  they  say,  '  How  are  these  (bricks) 
of  his  laid  down  so  as  not  to  be  excessive  ? '  Well, 
these  (bricks)  are  his  (Agni's)  vital  power,  and  man's 
vital  power  is  not  excessive.  Thus  whosoever, 
knowing  this,  performs  this  holy  work,  or  he  w^ho 
but  knows  this,  makes  up  this  Pra^apati  whole  and 
complete. 

Fourth  BRAiiMAiVA. 

1.  When  Pra^apati  was  creating  living  beings, 
Death,  that  evil,  overpowered  him.  He  practised 
austerities  for  a  thousand  years,  striving  to  leave 
evil  behind  him. 

2.  Whilst  he  was  practising  austerities,  lights  went 
upwards  from  those  hair-pits^  of  his ;  and  those 
lights  are  those  stars :  as  many  stars  as  there  are, 
so  many  hair-pits  there  are ;  and  as  many  hair-pits 
as  there  are,  so  many  muhurtas  there  are  in  a  (sacri- 
ficial performance)  of  a  thousand  years. 

3.  In  the  one-thousandth  year,  he  cleansed  him- 
self all  through  ;  and  he  that  cleansed  all  through 
is  this  wind  which  here  cleanses  by  blowing;  and 
that  evil  which  he  cleansed  all  through  is  this  body. 


'  See  IX,  2,  3,  14-17;  4,  3,  6.  '  See  VII,  2,  1,  i  seq. 

^  That  is,  the  pores  from  which  the  hairs  spring. 


362  5'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

But  what  is  man  that  he  could  secure  for  himself 
a  (life)  of  a  thousand  years  ^  ?  By  knowledge, 
assuredly,  he  who  knows  secures  for  himself  (the 
benefits  of  a  performance)  of  a  thousand  years. 

4.  Let  him  look  upon  all  these  bricks  as  a  thou- 
sandfold :  let  him  look  upon  each  enclosing-stone 
as  charged  with  a  thousand  nights,  each  day-holder  ^ 
with  a  thousand  days,  each  half-moon-holder  with 
a  thousand  half-moons,  each  month-holder  with  a 
thousand  months,  each  season-holder  with  a  thou- 
sand seasons,  each  muhurta-holder^  with  a  thousand 
muhurtas,  and  the  year  with  a  thousand  years. 
They  who  thus  know  this  Agni  as  being  endowed 
with  a  thousand,  know  his  one-thousandth  digit ;  but 
they  who  do  not  thus  know  him,  do  not  even  know 
a  one-thousandth  digit  of  him.  And  he  alone  who 
so  knows  this,  or  who  performs  this  sacred  work, 
obtains  this  whole  and  complete  Pra^apatean  Agni 
whom  Pra^apati  obtained.  Wherefore  let  him  who 
knows  this  by  all  means  practise  austerities  * ;  for, 
indeed,  when  he  who  knows  this  practises  austerities, 
even  to  (abstention  from)  sexual  intercourse,  every 
(part)  of  him  will  share  in  the  world  of  heaven  ^ 

^  Tasmai  sahasrasawvatsara^ivanaya  ko  va  manushya^  jaknuyat ; 
manushyavadhi//  ratam  ato  ^ivato  manushyewa  sahasrasa7;^vatsara/i 
praptum  a^akyat.    Say. 

^  That  is,  the  majority  of  Ya^ushmati  bricks,  viz.  360  of  them, 
whilst  the  remaining  ones  are  supposed  to  stand  in  Heu  of  half- 
moons,  months,  and  seasons;  see  X,  4,  3,  19. 

^  Viz.  the  Lokamp;7«a  bricks ;  see  X,  4,  3,  20. 

*  Or,  reHgious  fervour  (meditation). 

^  Or,  as  Sayawa  seems  to  interpret  it,  '  that  austerity  will  gain 
for  him  all  his  (Agni's  thousandfold  perfection)  and  the  heavenly 
world  (?),' — etat  tapa//  agues  tadavayavanaw  /^a  sahasratmakaiva- 
iupa.m  karoti  tasma>^  k?i  svargalokapraptir  bhavatity  arlha/;. 


X    KANDA,    4    ADHYAYA,    5    BRAHMAiVA,    2.         363 


5.  It  is  regarding  this  that  it  is  said  in  the  J^i'k 
(I,  179,  3),  'Not  in  vain  is  the  labour  which  the 
gods  favour ; '  for,  in  truth,  for  him  who  knows 
there  is  no  labouring  in  vain,  and  so,  indeed,  the 
gods  favour  this  every  (action)  of  his  '. 

Fifth  BuAiiMAiVA. 

1.  Now  the  doctrines  of  mystic  imports ^  The 
K^akayanins  hold  that  '  Agni  is  Vayu  (the  wind);' 
but  some  say  that  '  Agni  is  Aditya  (the  sun).'  And 
either  ^'raumatya,  or  Halihgava,  said,  'Agni  is 
no  other  than  Vayu  :  wherefore  the  Adhvaryu,  w^hen 
he  performs  the  last  work^  passes  into  that  (wind).' 

2.  And  ^'a/yayani  said,  'Agni  is  no  other  than 
the  Year ;  his  head  is  the  spring,  his  right  wing  the 
summer,  his  left  wing  the  rainy  season,  his  middle 
body  (trunk)  the  autumn  season,  and  his  tail  and 
feet  the  winter  and  dewy  seasons — Agni  is  speech, 
Vayu  breath,  the  sun  the  eye,  the  moon  the  mind, 
the  quarters  the  ear,  the  generative  power  water  S 
the  feet  (and  tail)  fervour,  the  joints  the  months,  the 
veins  the  half-moons,  the  silver  and  gold  feathers 


^  Eva;«vidvanyatkurutetatsarvawyadyasmaddevaavanti.  Say. 

2  Athanantaram  upanishada;//  rahasyarthanam  ade^a  upadeja 
vakshyante.  Say.  —  Prof.  Oldenberg  (Zeilsch.  of  G.  Or.  S.,  50, 
p.  457  seq.)  takes  'upanishad'  in  the  sense  of  '  worship.' 

'  That  is,  the  concluding  rites  of  the  sacrifice,— tasmad  adlivar- 
ynh  yada  uttama?«  ya^i;^//asamaptilaksha«am  karma  karoti,  tadailam 
eva  vayum  apyeli,  tatha  hi,  samish/aya^urhome  deva  gatuvido  gatu;« 
vittva  gatum  ita  manasaspata  iti  mantre^va^i,  svaha  vate  dha/i 
svaha,  iti  vayau  dharawam  uktam.  Say.  See  IV,  4,  4,  13,  where  the 
sacrifice  (though  not  the  Adhvaryu  priest)  is  consigned  to  the 
wind  by  means  of  the  Samish/aya^us  formulas. 

*  Note  the  change  in  the  relative  position  of  subject  and  predicate 
from  here. 


364  i-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAA^A. 

the  days  and  nights  :  thus  he  passes  over  to  the 
gods.'  Let  him  know,  then,  that  Agni  is  the  Year ; 
and  let  him  know  that  it  is  thereof^  he  consists. 

3.  And  A'elaka  .Sa/^^/ilyayana  said,  '  Let  him 
know  that  the  three  layers  containing  the  naturally- 
perforated  (bricks)  ^  are  these  worlds,  that  the  fourth 
(layer)  is  the  Sacrificer,  and  the  fifth  all  objects  of 
desire ;  and  that  it  is  these  worlds,  and  his  own  self 
and  all  his  objects  of  desire  he  compasses.' 

Fifth  Adhyava.     First  Brahmaa^a. 

1.  The  mystic  import  of  this  Fire-altar,  doubtless, 
is  Speech  ;  for  it  is  with  speech  that  it  is  built :  with 
the  I^i^,  the  Ya^us  and  the  Saman  as  the  divine 
(speech) ;  and  when  he  (the  Adhvaryu)  speaks  with 
human  speech,  'Do  ye  this!  do  ye  that!'  then  also 
it  (the  altar)  is  built  therewith. 

2.  Now,  this  speech  is  threefold — the  y?/k-verses, 
the  Ya^us-formulas,  and  the  Saman-tunes; — thereby 
the  Fire-altar  is  threefold,  inasmuch  as  it  is  built 
with  that  triad.  Even  thus,  then,  it  is  threefold ; 
but  in  this  respect  also  it  is  threefold,  inasmuch 
as  three  kinds  of  bricks  are  put  into  it — those 
with  masculine  names,  those  with  feminine  names, 
and  those  with  neuter  names ;  and  these  limbs  of 
men  also  are  of  three  kinds — those  with  masculine 
names,  those  with  feminine  names,  and  those  with 
neuter  names. 


^  That  is,  of  the  objects  enumerated  before. 

"  That  is,  the  first,  third,  and  fifth  layers.  By  the  fourth  and  fifth 
layers  mentioned  immediately  after,  we  have  not  of  course  to  under- 
stand the  real  fourth  and  fifth  layers,  but  the  two  making  up  the 
five  layers  (viz.  the  second  and  fourth). 


X    KANDA,    5    ADHYAYA,    I    BRAHMAiVA,    5.  365 


3.  This  body  (of  the  akar),  indeed,  is  threefold  ; 
and  with  this  threefold  body  he  obtains  the  three- 
fold divine  Amr/ta  (nectar,  immortality).  Now  all 
these  (bricks)  are  called  '  ish/aka  (f.),'  not  '  ish/a- 
ka/^  (m.);  nor  '  ish/akam  (n.) :'  thus  (they  are 
called)  after  the  form  of  speech  (va/c,  f.),  for  every- 
thing here  is  speech — whether  feminine  (female), 
masculine  (male),  or  neuter — for  by  speech  every- 
thing here  is  obtained.  Therefore  he  'settles'  all 
(the  bricks)  ^  with,  '  Ahgiras-like  lie  thou  steady 
(dhruva,  f.) !'  not  with,  'Ahgiras-like  lie  thou 
steady  (dhruva/^,  m.)!'  or  with,  'Ahgiras-like  lie 
thou  steady  (dhruvam,  n.)  !'  for  it  is  that  Speech  he 
is  constructing. 

4.  Now,  this  speech  is  yonder  sun,  and  this 
(Agni,  the  Fire-altar)  is  Death  :  hence  whatsoever 
is  on  this  side  of  the  sun  all  that  is  held  by  Death  ; 
and  he  who  builds  it  (the  Fire-altar)  on  this  side 
thereof,  builds  it  as  one  held  by  Death,  and  he 
surrenders  his  own  self  unto  Death  ;  but  he  who 
builds  it  thereabove,  conquers  recurring  Death, 
for  by  his  knowledge  that  (altar)  of  his  is  built 
thereabove. 

5.  This  speech,  indeed,  is  threefold — the  J^ik- 
verses,  the  Ya^s-formulas,  and  the  Saman-tunes  : 
the  i^/k-verses  are  the  orb,  the  Saman-tunes  the 
light,  and  the  Ya^s-formulas  the  man  (in  the  sun) ; 
and  that  immortal  element,  the  shining  light,  is  this 
lotus-leaf  2 :  thus,  when  he  builds  up  the  Fire-altar 

'  See  VI,  I,  2,  28;  VII,  I,  I,  30. 

2  Viz.  the  lotus-leaf  deposited  in  the  centre  of  the  altar-site, 
before  the  first  layer  is  laid  down,  see  VII,  4.  i-  7  seqq.,  where, 
however,  it  is  represented  as  symbolising  the  womb  whence  Agni 
(the  fire-altar)  is  to  be  born. 


366  S-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 


after  laying  down  the  lotus-leaf,  it  is  on  that  im- 
mortal element  that  he  builds  for  himself  a  body 
consisting  of  the  7?/k,  the  Ya^us,  and  the  Saman  ; 
and  he  becomes  immortal. 


Second  BRAHMAiVA. 

1.  Now,  that  shining  orb  is  the  Great  Litany,  the 
/?/k-verses :  this  is  the  world  of  the  Rik.  And 
that  glowing  light  is  (the  hymn  of)  the  Great  Rite, 
the  Saman-tunes  :  this  is  the  world  of  the  Saman. 
And  the  man  in  yonder  orb  is  the  Fire-altar, 
the    Ya^-us-formulas  :    this    is    the   world    of    the 

Ya^us. 

2.  It  is  this  threefold  lore  that  shines,  and  even 
they  who  do  not  know  this  say,  '  This  threefold  lore 
does  indeed  shine;'  for  it  is  Speech  that,  seeing  it, 
speaks  thus. 

3.  And  that  man  in  yonder  (sun's)  orb  is  no  other 
than  Death ;  and  that  glowing  light  is  that  im- 
mortal element :  therefore  Death  does  not  die,  for 
he  is  within  the  immortal  ;  and  therefore  he  is  not 
seen,  for  he  is  within  the  immortal  \ 

4.  There  is  this  verse: — 'Within  Death  is 
immortality,' — for  below  death  is  immortality; — 
'founded  on  Death  is  immortality,' — for  estab- 
lished on  that  man  (in  the  sun)  the  immortal 
shines  2; — 'Death  putteth  on  the  radiant,' — the 


^  Mr/tyuiupa/^  purusho^mrz'tarfipe^r^'ishy  antar  vartate,  .  .  . 
mr/tyo-^  purushasya  amr/tam  amntarGpar/^ir  adhikarawara  mawfl'a- 
1am  ahitam  pratishZ/zitam.    Saya^/a. 

^  'AntaraOT  mr^'tyor  amr/tam  ity  avarara  hy  etan  mr/tyor  am- 
r/tam'   ity   adina,   avaram    adhastadbhavam    amr/taw    purusha,^ 


X    KANDA,    5    ADHYAYA,    2     BRAHMAiVA,    6,  367 

radiant  one  (vivasvant),  doubtless,  is  yonder  sun,  for 
he  irradiates  (vi-vas)  day  and  night;  and  it  is  him  that 
(Death)  puts  on,  for  on  every  side  he  is  surrounded 
by  him; — '  Death's  self  is  in  the  radiant,' — for 
the  self  (body)  of  that  man  indeed  is  in  that  orb  : 
such,  then,  is  that  verse. 

5.  Now,  that  orb  is  the  foundation  (foothold)  of 
both  that  light  and  that  man ;  whence  one  must  not 
recite  the  Great  Litany  for  another  ^  lest  he  should 
cut  away  that  foothold  from  beneath  his  own  self; 
for  he  who  recites  the  Mahad  Uktham  for  another, 
indeed  cuts  away  that  foothold  from  beneath  his  own 
self:  wherefore  the  (professional)  singer  of  praises 
(vastra)  is  greatly  despised,  for  he  is  cut  off  from  his 
foothold.      Thus  in  regard  to  the  deity. 

6.  Now  as  to  the  sacrifice.  That  shining  orb 
is  the  same  as  this  gold  plate  (under  the  altar)  -, 
and  that  orlowinof  lioht  is  the  same  as  this  lotus- 
leaf  (under  the  altar) ;   for  there  are  those  (divine) 


parastad  ity  arthasiddha,^ ;  anena  amrztamadhyavartitvam  uktam 
ity  artha^ ;  dvitiyapadagatamr/tapadenarX'ir  adliikarawaw/  mawfl'alam 
uX'yate,  tat  purushe  pratish//nta///  tapati,  tena  hi  tasya  mawc/alasya 
^galprak;uakatvam  asti.  Say.  But  for  this  interpretation,  one 
might  have  rendered  the  first  pada  by, '  Close  unto  death  is  immor- 
tality,' for  after  death  comes  immortality. 

'  Cf.  Aitareyar.  V,  3,  3,  i,  'No  one  but  a  dikshita  (initiated) 
should  recite  the  Mahavrata  (jastra) ;  and  he  should  not  recite  it  at 
a  (Mahavrata)  unless  it  be  combined  with  (the  building  of)  a  fire- 
altar  ;  neither  should  he  do  so  for  another  person,  nor  at  a 
(sacrificial  session  lasting)  less  than  a  year,'  so  say  some ;  but  he 
may  recite  it  for  his  father  or  for  his  teacher,  for  in  that  case  it  is 
recited  on  his  own  behalf. 

^  In  these  symbolical  identifications,  one  might  also  take  the 
relative  clause  to  be  the  predicate,  not  the  subject,  of  the  sentence  ; 
the  former  usually  preceding  the  latter. 


^,6S  5'ATAPATHA-ERAHMAA'A. 


waters  \  and  the  lotus-leaf  is  water  ^•  and  that  man 
in  yonder  orb  is  no  other  than  this  gold  man  (in 
the  altar)  :  thus,  by  laying  down  these  (in  the  fire- 
altar),  it  is  that  (divine)  triad  he  constructs.  And 
after  the  consummation  of  the  sacrifice  it  rises 
upwards  and  enters  that  shining  (sun)  :  one  need 
not  therefore  mind  destroying  Agni,  for  he  is  then 
in  yonder  (world)  \  Thus,  then,  in  regard  to  the 
sacrifice. 

7.  Now  as  to  the  self  (body).  That  shining  orb 
and  that  gold  plate  are  the  same  as  the  white  here 
in  the  eye  ;  and  that  glowing  light  and  that  lotus- 
leaf  are  the  same  as  the  black  here  in  the  eye  ;  and 
that  man  in  yonder  orb  and  that  gold  man  are  the 
same  as  this  man  in  the  right  eye. 


^  Though  the  sun  itself  does  not  consist  of  water,  he  at  any  rate 
floats  along  a  sea  of  water  ;  cf.  VII,  5,  i,  8,  '  For  that  indeed  is  the 
deepest  of  waters  where  yonder  sun  shines ; '  and  there  are  waters 
above  and  below  the  sun,  VII,  i,  i,  24;  and  the  sun  is  encircled 
by  360  navigable  streams,  and  as  many  flow  towards  it,  X,  5,  4,  1 4. — 
Sayawa,  on  the  other  hand,  takes  it  to  mean,  '  for  that  (light)  is 
water,'  inasmuch  as  the  sun's  rays  produce  the  rain, — arX-isho  hy 
apa//  suryakirawanam  eva  vr/sh/ikartr/katvat  karyakaranayor  abhe- 
dena  ar-^ir  va  apa  ity  uktam.  Possibly  this  may  be  the  right 
interpretation. 

2  See  VII,  4,  I,  8,  where  the  lotus-plant  is  said  to  represent  the 
(cosmic)  waters,  whilst  the  earth  is  a  lotus-leaf  floating  on  the  waters. 

2  According  to  Sayawa,  he  is  so  in  the  shape  of  both  the  sun  and 
the  Sacrificer's  body  or  self, — yato^sminn  a^mrn  -^itavan  para- 
tradityo  bhavali,  ato^^gni/^  parihantu;;^  nadriyeta,  >^i/am  agnim 
ish/akavij-eshewa  na^ayitam  adaraw  na  /I'uryat,  kuta/^,  esho^gnir 
amutra  bhavati,  paraloke  ya^amana^-ariratmanotpadyate ;  yad  va 
parihantu?«  praptuw  sprash/um  ity  artha-^,  /('ilyagnispar^ane  dosha- 
j-rava;/at.  Saya«a,  thus,  is  doubtful  as  to  how^ '  Agnim  parihantum  '  is 
to  be  taken,  whether  it  means  '  to  injure  the  altar  (?  or  extinguish  the 
fire)  by  some  brick,'  or  to  '  knock  against  (touch)  the  altar.'  The 
St.  Peterbb.  Diet,  takes  it  in  the  sense  of  '  to  extinguish  the  fire,' 


X    KAA'DA,    5    ADHYAYA,    2    BRAHMA7VA,    9.  369 

8.  The  Lokampm^a  (space-filling  brick)  is  the 
same  as  that  (gold  man  in  the  sun)^:  it  is  that 
(brick)  which  this  entire  Agni  finally  results  in  2. 
Moreover,  this  man  (or  person)  in  the  left  eye  is 
the  mate  of  that  one  (in  the  right  eye  and  in  the 
sun);  and  a  mate  is  one  half  of  one's  own  self^, 
for  when  one  is  with  a  mate  he  is  whole  and  com- 
plete :  thus  it  (the  second  man)  is  for  the  sake  of 
completeness.  And  as  to  there  being  two  of  these 
(persons  in  the  eyes),  a  pair  means  a  productive 
couple  :  hence  two  LokamprzV^as  are  laid  down  each 
time*,  and  hence  they  set  up  the  layer  by  two 
(kinds  of  bricks). 

9.  Now,  that  person  in  the  right  eye  is  the  same 
as  Indra,  and  (that  other  person  is)  the  same  as 
Indra;/i :  it  is  for  the  sake  of  these  two  that  the 
gods  made  that  partition  (between  the  eyes),  the 
nose  ;  whence  he  (the  husband)  should  not  eat  food 
in   the   presence   of  his  wife^;   for  from   him   (who 

but  it   might  also,  perhaps,  mean   '  to   destroy  the  fire-altar '   by 
taking  it  to  pieces. 

'  On  the  identification  of  the  sun  with  the  Lokampr/«a  on  the 
ground  that  the  former  fills  these  worlds  (lokan  piirayati),  see  VIII, 

T        2        T 

"^  Or,  finally  comes  to;  viz.  inasmuch  as  it  is  by  the  placing  of 
the  Lokampr/wa  bricks  that  the  altar  is  completed  (Say.) ;  and 
inasmuch  as  Agni  passes  into  the  sun. 

'  Purusho  mithuna;«  yoshid  ity  etasmin  mithuna///  hy  atmano 
xrdham  ardhabhaga//,  ardho  va  csha  atmano  yat  patniti  taittiriya- 
jruteA.     Say. 

■•  When  the  layers  are  filled  up  with  '  space-fillers,'  two  Lokam- 
p/'z«as  are  first  laid  down  in  one  of  the  four  corners,  and  from  them 
the  available  spaces  are  then  filled  up,  in  two  turns,  in  the  sunwise 
direction;   cf.  p.  22,  note  i. 

^  Cf.  I,  9,  2,  12,  'whenever  women  here  eat,  they  do  so  apart 
from    men;'    where   the   use  of  the   '^Mghalsanti'  (swallow  their 

[43]  B  b 


3  JO  i'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

does  not  do  so)  a  vigorous  son  is  born,  and  she  in 
whose  presence  (the  husband)  does  not  eat  food 
bears  a  vigorous  (son) : — 

10.  Such, indeed, is  the  divine  ordinance; — amongst 
men  princes  keep  most  aloof  ^,  and  for  that  reason 
a  vigorous  (son)  is  born  to  them ;  and  of  birds  the 
Amr/tavaka  (does  so,  and  she)  produces  the  Kshi- 
prai-yena  ^. 

1 1.  Those  two  (persons  in  the  eyes)  descend  to  the 
cavity  of  the  heart  ^  and  enter  into  union  with  each 
other ;  and  when  they  reach  the  end  of  their  union, 
then  the  man  sleeps, — even  as  here  on  reaching  the 
end  of  a  human  union  he  becomes,  as  it  were, 
insensible  *,   so   does   he   then  become,   as   it  were, 

food) — as  against  a^-niyat  in  our  passage — is  not  meant  disrespect- 
fully, but  as  the  regular  desiderative  of  'ad'  (Paw.  11,  4,  37),  for 
which  no  doubt  '  a^i^ishanti '  (-Sat.  Br.  Ill,  i,  2,  i)  might  have 
been  used. 

*  Or,  '  act  most  in  secrecy.'  Saya«a  explains  it :  manushyawaw 
madhye  ra^anyabandhavo  ^  nutama/;/  gopayanti  atyartha/«  rahasyat- 
vena  kurvanti  tasmat  teshu  viryavan  putro^ayate.  The  St.  Petersb. 
Diet.,  on  the  other  hand,  takes  it  in  the  sense  of  'they  protect 
most  of  all ; '  though  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  the  '  protection ' 
afforded  by  princes  or  rulers  could  have  any  bearing  on  men  taking 
their  food  apart  from  their  wives.  If  the  above  interpretation  is 
right  we  may  compare  '  anu-gup '  in  the  sense  of  '  to  conceal.' 
See,  however,  the  next  note,  where  Sayawa  takes  '  gopayati '  in 
the  sense  of  '  observes  (that  law),'  which  might  also  have  suited 
here.  Princes,  having  their  seraglio,  would  naturally  have  less 
occasion  for  coming  into  contact  with  their  wives  at  mealtime  than 
men  of  lower  stations  of  life.  On  the  superlative  of  the  preposition, 
see  p.  287,  note  i. 

^  ?  The  swift  eagle, — vayasam  pakshiwam  madhye  anir/tavaka 
nama  pakshi^atir  elad  vrata?;;  gopayati,  ata//  sa  kshipra/?;  jighra- 
gaminaw  i'yenaw  nama  pakshi;/a;;/  ^anayati.     Say. 

^  H/7'dayasyakaja;«  daharam  prapya.    Say. 

*  That  is,  *  unconscious,'  with  something  of  '  indifferent,  apa- 
thetic,' implied : — Loke  manushasya  maithunasyantaw  gatva  '^  saw/- 


X    KANDA,    5    ADHYAYA,    2    BRAHMAiVA,    I4.        371 

insensible ;  for  this  is  a  divine  union  \  and  that  is 
the  highest  bhss. 

12.  Therefore  let  him,  who  knows  this,  sleep,  for 
it  makes  for  heaven  - :  he  thereby,  indeed,  makes 
those  two  deities  enjoy  their  dear  wish,  union.  And 
one  should  not  therefore  forcibly  ^  awaken  him  who 
sleeps,  lest  he  should  hurt  those  two  deities  whilst 
enjoying  their  union  ;  and  hence  the  mouth  of  him 
who  has  been  asleep  is,  as  it  were,  clammy,  for  those 
two  deities  are  then  shedding  seed,  and  from  that 
seed  everything  here  originates,  whatsoever  exists. 

13.  Now,  that  man  in  yonder  orb  (of  the  sun), 
and  that  man  in  the  right  eye  truly  are  no  other  than 
Death ;  —  his  feet  have  stuck  fast  in  the  heart, 
and  having  pulled  them  out  he  comes  forth  ;  and 
when  he  comes  forth  then  that  man  dies  :  whence 
they  say  of  him  who  has  passed  away,  '  he  has  been 
cut  off  ^' 

14.  And,  indeed,  he  is  the  breath  (pra;^a),  for  it 
is  he  (the  man  in  the  eye)  that  leads  forward  (pra- 
n3.y3.t1)  all  these  creatures.  These  vital  airs  (pra;2a) 
are  his  own  (sva) ;  and  when  he  sleeps  (svapiti)  then 

vida  a^dnaneva  nra  stri  bhavati  (marg.  corr.  a^ananav  eva  stripu- 
rushau  bhavata//)  evaw  tada  tayor  milhunabhave  (?  mithunabhave) 
purusho :«:  saw/vida  iva  bhavati.    Say. 

^  Viz.  because  it  is  the  union  of  Indra  and  Indra«i. 

^  Or,  perhaps,  it  is  the  usual  practice  (lokyam),  as  the  St.  Petersb. 
Diet,  takes  it. 

^  Dhureva  piiT^ayaiva  na  bodhayct,  na  prabuddhaw  kuryat,  dhur- 
vater  hiwsarthat  kvipi  /ablopc  rupam.    Say. 

*  ?  His  (Ufe)  has  been  cut  off;  or,  his  (life-string)  has  been 
severed.  Saya«a  (unless  there  is  an  omission  in  the  MS.)  does 
not  explain  '  A-a^/iedy  asya,'  but  seems  to  take'pretam'  (passed 
away)  as  the  word  on  which  the  stress  lies : — tasmad  imam  pretam 
ity  ahu//,  prapQrvad  ete//  ktapratyaye  rupam;  katham,  akshipurusha- 
nirgame  purushasya  maraz/am. 

B  b  2 


-1 


72  DATAPATH  A-BRAHMAA^A. 


these  vital  airs  take  possession  of  him '  as  his  own 
(sva  api-yanti) :  hence  (the  term)  '  svapyaya  (being 
taken  possession  of  by  one's  own  people),'  '  sva- 
pyaya '  doubtless  being  what  they  mystically  call 
'  svapna  (sleep),'  for  the  gods  love  the  mystic. 

15.  And  when  he  is  asleep,  he  does  not,  by 
means  of  them,  know  of  anything  whatever,  nor  does 
he  form  any  resolution  with  his  mind,  or  distinguish 
the  taste  of  food  with  (the  channel  of)  his  speech, 
or  distinguish  any  smell  with  (the  channel  of)  his 
breath  ;  neither  does  he  see  with  his  eye,  nor  hear 
with  his  ear,  for  those  (vital  airs)  have  taken  pos- 
session of  him.  Whilst  being  one  only,  he  (the 
man  in  the  eye)  is  numerously  distributed  among 
living  beings  :  whence  the  Lokampr/z/a  (representing 
the  man  in  the  sun),  whilst  being  one  only  (in  kind), 
extends  over  the  whole  altar  ;  and  because  he  (the 
man  in  the  eye)  is  one  only,  therefore  (the  Lokam- 
przu3.)  is  one. 

16.  As  to  this  they  say,  'One  death,  or  many?' 
Let  him  say,  'Both  one  and  many;'  for  inasmuch 
as  he  is  that  (man  in  the  sun)  in  yonder  world  he  is 
one,  and  inasmuch  as  he  is  numerously  distributed 
here  on  earth  among  living  beings,  there  are  also 
many  of  them. 

17.  As  to  this  they  say,  '  Is  Death  near  or  far 
away?'  Let  him  say,  'Both  near  and  far  away;' 
for  inasmuch  as  he  is  here  on  earth  in  the  body 
he  is  near,  and  inasmuch  as  he  is  that  one  in  yonder 
world  he  also  is  far  away. 

18.  Regarding   this   there    is    the  verse, — '  Con- 


'  Or,  they  keep  within  him,  they  nestle  in  him, — apiyanti  prap- 
nuvanti,  aliyanta  ity  artha//.    Say. 


X    KANDA,    5    ADHYAVA,    2    BRAHMAiVA,   20.  373 

cealed  in  food  he,  the  immortal,  shineth  at  the 
flowing  together  of  vital  saps;' — yonder  shining 
orb  is  food,  and  the  man  in  that  orb  is  the  eater  : 
beine  concealed  in  that  food,  he  shines.  Thus 
much  as  to  the  deity. 

19.  Now  as  to  the  body.  This  body  indeed 
is  food,  and  that  man  in  the  right  eye  is  the  eater  : 
beine  concealed  in  that  food  he  shines. 

20.  That  same  (divine  person),  the  Adhvaryus 
(Ya^ur-veda  priests)  serve  under  the  name  of 'Agni' 
(fire-altar)  and  '  Ya^^us,'  because  he  holds  together 
(yui;^)  all  this  (universe)  ^  the  AV^andogas  (Sama-veda 
priests,  chanters)  under  that  of  '  Saman,'  because 
in  him  all  this  (universe)  is  one  and  the  same 
(samana)-;  the  Bahvr/Z'as  (7?/g-veda  priests,  Hotars) 
under  that  of  '  Uktham,'  because  he  originates 
(utthap)  ever)  thing  here ;  those  skilled  in  sorcery, 
under  that  of  '  sorcery  (yatu),'  because  everything 
here  is  held  in  check  (yata)  by  him  ;  the  serpents 
under  that  of  'poison;'  the  snake-charmers  under 
that  of '  snake ; '  the  gods  under  that  of  '  mo-  (strength- 
ening food);'  men  under  that  of  'wealth;'  demons 
under  that  of  '  maya  (magic  power)  ;'  the  deceased 
Fathers  under  that  of  '  svadha  (invigorating 
draught)  ;'  those  knowing  the  divine  host  under 
that  of  '  divine  host ;'  the  Gandharvas  under  that  of 
'  form  (riipa  ^) ;'  the  Apsaras  under  that  of  '  fragrance 
(gandha),' — thus,  in  whatsoever  form  they  serve  him 
that  indeed  he  becomes,  and,  having  become  that, 

'  Esha  purusha  kh?n  sarva;«  ^agad  yunakli  sarvatra  svayaw 
sa/wgata  iti.    Say. 

^  Elasmin   [)aramatmani   karawe    sarvaw   karya^^alaw   samanani 

iti.    Say. 

^  The  characteristic  attributes  of  the  Gandharvas  and  Apsaras 
arc  evidently  exchanged  in  the  text  as  it  stands;  of.  IX,  4,  i,  4. 


174  DATAPATH  A-BRAHMAATA. 


he  is  helpful  to  them  ;  whence  he  who  knows  should 
serve  him  in  all  these  (forms),  for  he  becomes  all  that, 
and,  having  become  all  that,  he  is  helpful  to  him. 

2  1.  Now  this  Agni  (fire-altar)  consists  of  three 
bricks, — the  Rik  being  one,  the  Ya^us  another, 
and  the  Saman  another  :  whatever  (brick)  he  lays 
down  here  with  a  rik  (verse)  that  has  the  gold  plate 
for  its  foundation  ^ ;  whatever  (brick  he  lays  down) 
with  a  ya^us  (formula)  that  has  the  (gold)  man  for 
its  foundation ;  and  whatever  (brick  he  lays  down) 
with  a  saman  (hymn-tune)  that  has  the  lotus-leaf  for 
its  foundation.     Thus  he  consists  of  three  bricks. 

2  2.  And,  indeed,  these  two,  to  wit,  that  gold  plate 
and  that  lotus-leaf  join  that  (gold)  man,  for  both 
the  Rik  and  the  Saman  join  the  Ya^s  ;  and  so  he 
also  consists  of  a  single  brick. 

23.  Now,  that  man  in  yonder  orb  (of  the  sun), 
and  this  man  in  the  right  eye,  are  no  other  than 
Death  ^ ;  and  he  becomes  the  body  (self)  of  him 
who  knows  this  :  whenever  he  who  knows  departs 
this  world  he  passes  into  that  body,  and  becomes 
immortal,  for  Death  is  his  own  self. 

Third  BRAHMAiVA. 

I.  Verily,  in  the  beginning  this  (universe)  was, 
as  it  were  ^,  neither  non-existent  nor  existent ;    in 

'  Viz.  inasmuch  as  the  (round)  gold  plate  (representing  the  sun) 
is  deposited  in  the  centre  of  the  altar-site,  before  the  first  layer  is 
constructed.     In  the  same  way  the  other  two  objects. 

-  Sayawa  seems  to  construe  this  somewhat  differently :  sa  esho 
I  gnir  ya^uratmako  ^^  dhidaiva?;/  maw^/alamadhyavarti  adhyatma/« 
dakshiwakshivartt  purusho  mr/Lyurupa/z. 

^  Sayawa  seems  to  take  '  iva '  here  in  the  sense  of '  eva,'  as  indeed 
it  often  has  to  be  taken,  especially  in  negative  sentences. 


X    KAiVDA,    5    ADIIYAYA,   3  BRAHMAiVA,   3.  375 

the  beginning  this  (universe),  indeed,  as  it  were, 
existed  and  did  not  exist :  there  was  then  only  that 
Mind. 

2.  Wherefore  it  has  been  said  by  the  ^/shi 
(7?/g-veda  X,  129,  i),  '  There  was  then  neither  the 
non-existent  nor  the  existent ; '  for  Mind  was,  as  it 
were,  neither  existent  nor  non-existent. 

3.  This  Mind,  when  created,  wished  to  become 
manifest, — more  defined  \  more  substantial  :  it 
sought  after  a  self  (body)  -.  It  practised  austerity^: 
it  acquired  consistency*.  It  then  beheld  thirty-six 
thousand  Arka-fires  ^  of  its  own  self,  composed  of 
mind,  built  up  of  mind  :  mentally  ^  alone  they  were 
established    (on    sacrificial    hearths)    and    mentally 


^  Niruktatara/«  nirukta/w  jabdanirva/^yam.     Say. 

^  Sayawa  also  allows  the  interpretation,  '  after  (its  source,  or 
cause,)  the  (supreme)  self,' — atmanaw  svakara;/az?2  paramatmana;/i 
svasvarupa^/z  va  x  nvaiX'i(';^at.  What  seems,  indeed,  implied  in  these 
esoteric  lucubrations,  is  that  meditation  on  the  infinite  is  equivalent 
to  all  ceremonial  rites  which  are  supposed  to  be  incessantly  per- 
formed for  one  so  engaged,  even  during  his  sleep  (paragraph  12). 

^  I.  e.  intense  meditation  (paryalokanam),  Say.  ? '  it  became  heated.' 

*  Sayawa  apparently  lakes  '  pramurX7/at '  in  the  sense  of  '  became 
great,  or  important,'—  samuX'X'/^ritam  babhuva. 

^  Sayawa  here  takes  '  arka '  in  the  sense  of  '  ar/('aniya  (worthy  of 
veneration),  as,  indeed,  he  did  several  times  before ;  though  once 
he  seems  to  call  them  '  agnyarka/^,'  as  being  the  highest,  merely 
speculative  or  immaterial  form  of  sacrificial  fires  or  fire-altars 
(dhyeya  agnaya//) ;  cf.  X,  3,  4,  3  seq. — The  36,000  fires  are  calcu- 
lated so  as  to  be  equal  to  the  number  of  days  in  the  life  of  the  perfect 
man  living  a  hundred  years  (X,  2,  6,  9);  there  being  thus  for  each 
day  of  his  life  a  (spiritual)  sacrificial  fire,  a  mental  exercise  or 
discipline,  as  Saya«a  expresses  it, — tatraikasmin  dine  (agneya  ?) 
mznovri'ttih. 

*  The  text  has  everywhere  the  instrumental  '  manasa,'  which 
would  imply  either  the  agent,  the  instrument,  or  the  material,  as  the 
case  might  be. 


376  5ATAPATHA-BRAHMAi\rA. 

built  up^;  mentally  the  cups  (of  Soma)  were  drawn 
thereat ;  mentally  they  chanted,  and  mentally  they 
recited  on  (near)  them, — whatever  rite  is  performed 
at  the  sacrifice,  whatever  sacrificial  rite  there  is, 
that  was  performed  mentally  only,  as  a  mental  per- 
formance, on  those  (fires  or  fire-altars)  composed  of 
mind,  and  built  up  of  mind.  And  whatever  it  is  that 
(living)  beings  here  conceive  in  their  mind  that  was 
done  regarding  those  (mental  Agnis  ^) :  — they  establish 
them  (on  the  hearths)  and  build  them  up  (as  fire- 
altars)  ;  they  draw  the  cups  for  them  ;  they  chant  on 
(near)  them  and  recite  hymns  on  them, — of  that 
extent  was  the  development  of  Mind,  of  that  extent 
Its  creation, — so  great  is  Mind  :  thirty-six  thousand 
Arka-fires  ;  and  each  of  these  as  great  as  that 
former  (fire-altar)  was. 

4.  That  Mind  created  Speech.  This  Speech, 
when  created,  wished  to  become  manifest, — more 
defined,  more  substantial :  it  sought  after  a  self. 
It  practised  austerity:  it  acquired  consistency.  It 
beheld  thirty-six  thousand  Arka-fires  of  its  own  self, 
composed  of  speech,  built  up  of  speech  :  with  speech 
they  were  established,  and  with  speech  built  up  ; 
with  speech  the  cups  were  drawn  thereat ;  with 
speech  they  chanted,  and  with  speech  they  recited 
on  them — whatever  rite  is  performed  at  the  sacri- 
fice,   whatever    sacrificial    rite    there    is,    that    was 


^  That  is,  the  ceremonies  of  Agnjadhana  (establishment  of  the 
sacrificial  fire)  and  AgniX-ayana  (building  of  the  fire-altar)  were 
performed  by  means  of  these  fires.  Saya;ia  remarks  that  these  rites 
were  performed  by  the  same  '  beings  (bhutani),'  which  are  men- 
tioned immediately  after,  as  would,  indeed,  appear  to  be  the  case 
from  paragraph  12. 

2  Yat  kim  H  bhfitani  manasa  dhyayanti  vaM  vadanli  tai/i  sa?//- 
kalpavadanadibhir  eva  teshani  agninam  kara«am.    Say. 


X    KA.VDA,    5    ADHYAYA,   3  BRAHMAiVA,  6.  377 

performed  by  speech  alone,  as  a  vocal  performance, 
on  those  (fires)  composed  of  speech,  and  built  up  of 
speech.  And  whatever  beings  here  speak  by  speech 
that  was  done  regarding  those  (fires) :  they  establish 
them  and  build  them  up ;  they  draw  the  cups  for 
them ;  they  chant  on  them  and  recite  hymns  on 
them, —  of  that  extent  was  the  development  of 
Speech,  of  that  extent  its  creation, — so  great  is 
Speech :  thirty-six  thousand  Arka-fires ;  and  each 
of  these  as  great  as  that  former  (fire-altar)  was. 

5.  That  Speech  created  the  Breath.  This  Breath, 
when  created,  wished  to  become  manifest, — more 
defined,  more  substantial  :  it  sought  after  a  self 
It  practised  austerity  :  it  acquired  consistency.  It 
beheld  thirty-six  thousand  Arka-fires  of  its  own  self, 
composed  of  breath,  built  up  of  breath  :  with  breath 
they  were  established,  and  with  breath  built  up ; 
with  breath  the  cups  were  drawn  thereat ;  with 
breath  they  chanted  and  with  breath  they  recited 
on  them, — whatever  rite  is  performed  at  the  sacri- 
fice, whatever  sacrificial  rite  there  is,  that  was 
performed  by  breath  alone,  as  a  breathing-per- 
formance, on  those  (fires)  composed  of  breath,  and 
built  up  of  breath.  And  whatever  beings  here 
breathe  with  breath  that  was  done  regarding  those 
(fires)  : — they  establish  them,  and  build  them  up  ; 
they  draw  the  cups  for  them  ;  they  chant  on  them 
and  recite  hymns  on  them, — of  that  extent  was  the 
development  of  Breath,  of  that  extent  was  its 
creation, — so  great  is  Breath  :  thirty-six  thousand 
Arka-fires ;  and  each  of  these  as  great  as  that 
former  (fire-altar)  was. 

6.  That  Breath  created  the  Eye.  This  Eye, 
when  created,  wished    to  become   manifest, — more 


378  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

defined,  more  substantial :  it  sought  after  a  self. 
It  practised  austerity:  it  acquired  consistency.  It 
beheld  thirty-six  thousand  Arka-fires  of  its  own  self, 
composed  of  the  eye,  built  up  of  the  eye  :  by  means 
of  the  eye  they  were  established,  and  by  means  of 
the  eye  built  up ;  by  the  eye  the  cups  were  drawn 
thereat ;  by  means  of  the  eye  they  chanted  and 
recited  hymns  on  them, — whatever  rite  is  performed 
as  the  sacrifice,  whatever  sacrificial  rite  there  is, 
that  was  performed  by  the  eye  alone,  as  an  eye- 
performance,  on  those  (fires)  composed  of  eye,  and 
built  up  of  the  eye.  And  whatever  beings  here  see 
with  the  eye  that  was  done  regarding  those  (fires) : — 
they  establish  them  and  build  them  up ;  they  draw 
the  cups  for  them  ;  they  chant  on  them  and  recite 
hymns  on  them, — of  that  extent  was  the  develop- 
ment of  the  Eye,  of  that  extent  its  creation, — so 
great  is  the  Eye  :  thirty-six  thousand  Arka-fires  ; 
and  each  of  these  as  great  as  that  former  (fire- 
altar)  was. 

7.  That  Eye  created  the  Ear.  This  Ear,  when 
created,  wished  to  become  manifest, — more  defined, 
more  substantial :  it  sought  after  a  self.  It  practised 
austerity  :  it  acquired  consistency.  It  beheld  thirty- 
six  thousand  Arka-fires  of  its  own  self,  composed  of 
the  ear,  built  up  of  the  ear :  by  means  of  the  ear 
they  were  established,  and  by  means  of  the  ear 
built  up  ;  by  the  ear  the  cups  were  drawn  thereat ; 
by  means  of  the  ear  they  chanted  and  recited  hymns 
on  them, — whatever  rite  is  performed  at  the  sacri- 
fice, whatever  sacrificial  rite  there  is,  that  was 
performed  by  the  ear  alone,  as  an  ear-performance, 
on  those  (fires)  composed  of  ear,  and  built  up  of  the 
ear.     And  whatever  beings  here  hear  with  the  ear 


X    KAiVDA,    5    ADIIYAYA,    3    BRAHMAiVA,  9.         379 

that  was  done  regarding  those  (fires) : — they  establish 
them  and  build  them  up  ;  they  draw  the  cups  for 
them  ;  they  chant  on  them  and  recite  hymns  on 
them, — of  that  extent  was  the  development  of  the 
Ear,  of  that  extent  its  creation, — so  great  is  the 
Ear :  thirty-six  thousand  Arka-fires ;  and  each  of 
these  as  great  as  that  former  (fire-altar)  was. 

8.  That  Ear  created  Work,  and  this  condensed 
itself  into  the  vital  airs,  into  this  compound,  this 
composition  of  food  ^ ;  for  incomplete  is  work  without 
the  vital  airs,  and  incomplete  are  the  vital  airs 
without  work. 

9.  This  Work,  when  created,  wished  to  become 
manifest, — more  defined,  more  substantial  :  it  sought 
after  a  self.  It  practised  austerity  :  it  acquired 
consistency.  It  beheld  thirty-six  thousand  Arka- 
fires  of  its  own  self,  composed  of  w^ork,  built  up  of 
(or  by)  work  :  by  work  they  were  established,  and 
by  work  built  up  ;  by  work  the  cups  were  drawn 
thereat ;  by  work  they  chanted  and  recited  hymns 
on  them, — whatever  rite  is  performed  at  the  sacrifice, 
whatever  sacrificial  rite  there  is,  that  was  performed 
by  work  alone,  as  a  work-performance,  on  those 
(fires)  composed  of  work,  and  built  up  of  w^ork. 
And  whatever  beings  here  work  by  work  that  was 
done  regarding  those  (fires) ; — they  establish  them 
and  build  them  up  ;  they  draw  the  cups  for  them  ; 
they  chant  on  them  and  recite  hymns  on  them, — of 
that  extent  was  the  development  of  Work,  of  that 

^  Sayana  explains  '  sawdegham  annasawdeham  '  by  '  annapra«a- 
srdiyam  i'aiiram,' — svayam  asa/«deham  ajariraw  sat  karma  pra/zan- 
nayor  anyonyasaha>('aryad  abhivr/ddhiw  vyatiickam  makhyenaha, 
akr/isnam  &c.  Saya//a  would  thus  take  '  sawdegha '  as  equivalent 
to  the  later  '  deha '  (body),  and  in  no  depreciatory  sense. 


380  5'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAA^A. 

extent  its  creation, — so  great  is  Work  :  thirty-six 
thousand  Arka-fires ;  and  each  of  these  as  great  as 
that  former  (fire-altar)  was. 

10.  That  Work  created  the  Fire, — Fire,  doubtless, 
is  more  manifest  than  Work,  for  by  work  (sacrificial 
performance)  they  produce  it,  and  by  work  they 
kindle  it. 

11.  This  Fire,  when  created,  wished  to  become 
manifest, — more  defined,  more  substantial :  it  sought 
after  a  self.  It  practised  austerity  M  it  acquired 
consistency.  It  beheld  thirty-six  thousand  Arka- 
fires  of  its  own  self,  composed  of  fire,  built  up  of 
fire :  with  fire  they  were  established,  and  with  fire 
built  up  ;  with  fire  the  cups  were  drawn  thereat ; 
with  fire  they  chanted  and  recited  hymns  on  them  ; — 
whatever  rite  is  performed  at  the  sacrifice,  whatever 
sacrificial  rite  there  is,  that  was  performed  with  fire 
alone,  as  a  fire-performance,  on  those  (fires)  com- 
posed of  fire,  and  built  up  of  fire.  And  whatever 
fire  beings  here  kindle  that  was  done  regarding 
those  (fires)  : — they  establish  them  and  build  them 
up ;  they  draw  the  cups  for  them  ;  they  chant  on 
them  and  recite  hymns  on  them, — of  that  extent 
was  the  development  of  Fire,  of  that  extent  its 
creation, — so  great  is  Fire :  thirty-six  thousand 
Arka-fires  ;  and  each  of  these  as  great  as  that 
former   (fire-altar)  was. 

12.  These  fires  (altars),  in  truth,  are  knowledge- 
built  ;  and  all  beings  at  all  times  build  them  for  him 
who  knows  this,  even  whilst  he  is  asleep  :  by  know- 
ledge alone  these  fires  (altars)  are  indeed  built  for 
him  who  knows  this. 

^  Or,  fervid  devotion ;  though  perhaps  the  physical  sense  of '  it 
became  heated '  would  suit  better  here. 


X    KANDA,    5    ADHYAVA,    4    BRAHMAiVA,   2.         38 1 


Fourth   BuAHMAivA. 

1.  Verily,  this  {brick-)built  Fire-altar  (Agni)  is  this 
(terrestrial)  world  : — the  waters  (of  the  encircling 
ocean)  are  its  (circle  of)  enclosing-stones  ;  the  men 
its  Ya^Lishmatis  (bricks  with  special  formulas)  ; 
the  cattle  its  Sudadohas  ^  ;  the  plants  and  trees 
its  earth-fillings  (between  the  layers  of  bricks),  its 
oblations  and  fire-logs  - ;  Agni  (the  terrestrial  fire) 
its  Lokampr/;/a  (space-filling  brick)  ; — thus  this 
comes  to  make  up  the  whole  Agni,  and  the  whole 
Agni  comes  to  be  the  space-filler  ^ ;  and,  verily, 
whosoever  knows  this,  thus  comes  to  be  that  whole 
(Agni)  who  is  the  space-filler  *. 

2.  But,  indeed,  that  Fire-altar  also  is  the  air : — 
the  junction  of  heaven  and  earth  (the  horizon)  is 
its  (circle  of)  enclosing-stones,  for  it  is  beyond  the 
air  that  heaven  and  earth  meet,  and  that  (junction) 
is  the  (circle  of)  enclosing-stones  ;  the  birds  are  its 
Ya^shmati  bricks,  the  rain  its  Sudadohas,  the  rays 


^  That  is,  either  the  food  obtained  bv  the  milking  of  the  drink 
of  immortality  (amrnadohannam).  or  the  verse  ^/g-veda  VIII,  69, 
3  (ta  asya  sudadohasa//,  &c.)  pronounced  over  the  'settled'  brick, 
and  supposed  to  supply  vital  air  to  the  different  parts  of  Agni- 
Pra^apati's  body  (whence  it  is  also  repeated  in  the  Brz'had  Uktham 
between  the  different  parts  of  the  bird-like  body;  cf.  p.  112, 
note  i).     Say. 

"^  Sayawa  seems  to  interpret  this  in  two  different  ways, — oshadhi- 
vanaspataya  eva  purishahutisamittrayarupa  etasya  purishdhutisamit- 
trayaiflpatvani  uttaratra  spash/ikari>liyale ;  atlia  (va)  yad  dikshu  X-a 
ra^mishu  X-annaw  tat  puri^^ha»/  ta  ahutayas  ta/?  samidha^. 

^  See  X,  5,  2,  8.  Viz.  'inasmuch  as  all  become  fit  for  their 
work  by  being  provided  with  fire.'     Say. 

*  Or,  the  word-filler,  the  ruler  of  the  world  (lokadhishMatr/). 
Say. 


382  i-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

of  light  its  earth-fillings,  oblations  and  fire-logs  ; 
Vayu  (the  wind)  is  its  space-filler  ;  thus  this  comes 
to  make  up  the  whole  Agni,  and  the  whole  Agni 
comes  to  be  the  space-filler ;  and,  verily,  whosoever 
knows  this,  thus  comes  to  be  that  whole  (Agni)  who 
is  the  space-filler. 

3.  But,  indeed,  that  Fire-altar  also  is  the  sky  : — 
the  (heavenly)  waters  are  its  enclosing-stones,  for 
even  as  a  case  ^  here  is  closed  up  so  are  these 
worlds  (enclosed)  within  the  waters ;  and  the  waters 
beyond  these  worlds  are  the  enclosing-stones ; — the 
crods  are  the  Ya^ushmati  bricks  ;  what  food  there  is 
in  that  world  is  its  Sudadohas ;  the  Nakshatras 
(lunar  mansions)  are  the  earth-fillings,  the  oblations 
and  the  fire-logs ;  and  Aditya  (the  sun)  is  the  space- 
filler  ; — thus  this  comes  to  make  up  the  whole  Agni; 
and  the  whole  Agni  comes  to  be  the  space-filler  ; 
and,  verily,  whosoever  knows  this,  thus  comes  to  be 
that  whole  (Agni)  who  is  the  space-filler. 

4.  But,  indeed,  that  Fire-altar  also  is  the  sun  : — 
the  regions  are  its  enclosing-stones,  and  there  are 
three  hundred  and  sixty  of  these  ^,  because  three 
hundred  and  sixty  regions  encircle  the  sun  on  all 
sides ; — the  rays  are  its  Ya^ushmati  bricks,  for  there 
are  three  hundred  and  sixty  of  these  ^,  and  three 
hundred  and  sixty  rays  of  the  sun ;  and  in  that 
he  establishes  the  Yac^ushmatis  within  the  enclosing- 
stones  thereby  he  establishes  the  rays  in  the  regions. 
And  what  is  between  the  regions  and  the  rays,  is  its 
Sudadohas ;  and  what  food  there  is  in  the  regions 
and  rays  that  is  the  earth-fillings,  the  oblations  and 

'  Or,  as  (the  valves,  or  shells,  of)  a  pod  are  closed  up. 
2  See  p.  354,  note  2.  ^  See  IX,  4,  3,  6. 


X    KANDA,    5    ADHYAYA,    4    BRAHMAiVA,    5.  T,S^^ 

the  fire-logs  ;  and  that  which  is  called  both  'regions' 
and  'rays'  is  the  space-filling  (brick): — thus  this 
comes  to  make  up  the  whole  Agni  ;  and  the  whole 
Agni  comes  to  be  the  space-filler ;  and,  verily, 
whosoever  knows  this,  thus  comes  to  be  that  whole 
(Agni)  who  is  the  space-filler. 

5.  But,  indeed,  that  Fire-altar  also  is  the  Nak- 
shatras : — for  there  are  twenty-seven  of  these 
Nakshatras,  and  twenty-seven  secondary  stars 
accompany  each  Nakshatra, — this  makes  seven 
hundred  and  twenty  \  and  thirty-six  in  addition 
thereto.  Now  what  seven  hundred  and  twenty 
bricks  ^  there  are  of  these,  they  are  the  three 
hundred  and  sixty  enclosing-stones  and  the  three 
hundred  and  sixty  Ya^ushmati  bricks ;  and  what 
thirty-six  there  are  in  addition,  they  are  the 
thirteenth  (intercalary)  month,  the  body  (of  the 
altar) ;  the  trunk  ^  (consisting  of)  thirty,  the  feet 
of  two,  the  (channels  of  the)  vital  airs  of  two  *, 
and  the  head  itself  being  the  (thirty-fifth  and) 
thirty-sixth, — and  as  to  there  being  two  of  these, 
it  is  because  '  ^-iras '  (head)  consists  of  two  syllables ; 
— and    what    (space)   there   is    between   (each)   two 

^  On  this  inaccurate  calculation  (the  real  product  being  729), 
resorted  to  in  order  to  get  a  total  amount  equal  to  the  number  of 
Ya^ushmati  bricks  (756),  see  A.  Weber,  Nakshatra,  II,  p.  298. 

^  That  is,  Nakshatras  considered  as  the  bricks  of  which  the  fire- 
altar  is  constructed.  The  latter  being  identical  with  the  year,  the 
720  bricks  represent  the  days  and  nights  of  the  year. 

^  Thus  Sayawa  (madhyadeha), — the  atman  (in  that  case,  how- 
ever, the  whole  body)  is  usually  represented  as  consisting  of  twenty- 
five  parts.  Here  the  thirty  parts  would  probably  be  the  trunk,  the 
head,  the  upper  and  fore-arms,  the  thighs  and  shanks,  and  the 
fingers  and  toes. 

*  Viz.  inasmuch  as  eyes,  ears,  and  nostrils  are  in  pairs.    Say. 


n 


84  5ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 


Nakshatras  that  is  the  Sudadohas  ;  and  what  food 
there  is  in  the  Nakshatras  that  is  the  earth-fiUings 
(between  the  layers  of  bricks),  the  oblations  and 
the  fire-logs ;  and  what  is  called  '  nakshatras '  that 
is  the  space-filling  (brick) : — thus  this  comes  to 
make  up  the  whole  Agni,  and  the  whole  Agni 
comes  to  be  the  space-filler ;  and,  verily,  whosoever 
knows  this,  thus  comes  to  be  that  whole  (Agni)  who 
is  the  space-filler. 

6.  Now,  these  (amount  to)  twenty-one  Br/hatis^; 
and — the  heavenly  world  being  the  twenty-one-fold 
one"  and  the  Brihati  (the  great  one) — this  (altar) 
thus  comes  to  be  equal  to  the  heavenly  world,  and 
to  the  twenty-one-fold  Stoma  (hymn-form)  and  the 
Br/hati  metre. 

7.  But,  indeed,  that  Fire-altar  also  is  the  Metres ; 
for  there  are  seven  of  these  metres,  increasing  by 
four  syllables  '^ ;  and  the  triplets  of  these  make  seven 
hundred  and  twenty  syllables,  and  thirty-six  in 
addition  thereto.  Now  what  seven  hundred  and 
twenty  bricks  there  are  of  these,  they  are  the 
three  hundred  and  sixty  enclosing-stones  and  the 
three  hundred  and  sixty  Ya^ushmatis  ;  and  what 
thirty-six  there  are  in  addition,  they  are  the 
thirteenth  month,  and  the  body  (of  this  altar), — 
the    trunk    (consisting  of)    thirty,  the  feet  of  two, 

^  The  Br/hati  verse  consisting  of  36  syllables,  this  makes  a  total 
of  756  syllables,  or  the  same  amount  as  that  of  the  days  and  nights 
of  the  year,  plus  the  days  (36)  of  the  intercalary  month. 

^  Viz.  inasmuch  as  the  sun  is  'the  twenty-first,'  cf.  I,  3,  5,  11  ; 
VI,  2,  2,  3:  svargas  tv  aditya  iti  surake(tu)rupo  va  lokz/i  svarga>^ 
ekavi/wi-atisaz/ikhyapuraka/^.    Say. 

^  The  seven  metres,  increasing  by  four  syllables  from  24  up  to 
48,  consist  together  of  252  syllables,  and  hence  the  triplets  of  them 
amount  to  756  =  720 -|- 36  syllables. 


X    KANDA,    5    ADIIYAYA,    4    BRAHMAiVA,  8.         385 


the  vital  airs  of  two,  and  the  head  itself  being  the 
(thirty-fifth  and)  thirty-sixth  ;  and  as  to  there  being 
two  of  these,  it  is  because  '  jiras '  consists  of  two 
syllables. 

8.  Now^  the  first  ten  syllables  of  this  Br/hati, 
consisting  of  thirty-six  syllables,  make  an  Ekapada  ^ 
of  ten  syllables ;  and  the  (first)  twenty  make 
a  Dvipada  of  twenty  syllables ;  and  the  (first) 
thirty  a  Vira^-  of  thirty  syllables;  and  the  (first) 
thirty-three  a  (Viraf)  of  thirty-three  syllables  ;  and 
the  (first)  thirty-four  a  Svara^^  ^f  thirty-four 
syllables  ;  and  in  that  this  fire-altar  is  built  with 
all  metres  thereby  it  is  an  Ati/{V/andas  ^  and  (so) 
indeed  are  all  these  bricks  ^  And  the  three 
syllables  '  ish/aka  (brick) '  are  a  Gayatri  tripada, 
whence  this  Agni  is  Ga)atra ;  and  the  three 
syllables  '  mrid '  (clay)  and  '  apa/i '  (water) «  also 
are  a  Gayatri  tripada :  thereby  also  he  is  Gayatra. 
And    what    is    between   (each    two)    metres    is    the 


^  The  Ekapada  is  a  verse  consisting  of  a  single  pada,  and  the 
Dvipada  one  of  two  padas,  whilst  verses  in  the  ordinary  metres 
consist  of  three  or  four  padas. 

^  The  Vira^  is  a  metre  consisting  of  i  to  4  (usually  3)  decasyllabic 
padas;  the  one  consisting  of  four  such  padas  being,  however, 
commonly  called  Pahkti.  Besides  this,  the  principal,  Vira^^,  there 
is,  however,  another  consisting  of  3  padas  of  1 1  syllables  each. 

'  This  name,  which  is  here  applied  to  a  verse  of  34  syllables, 
was  in  VII,  4,  i,  9  used  of  a  verse  of  10+10+11  +  11  =  42 
syllables  {Yag.  S.  XI,  29) ;  cf.  Weber,  Ind.  Stud.  VIII,  p.  63. 

*  That  is,  an  over-metre,  excessive  metre,  consisting  of  more 
than  48  syllables.  The  fire-altar,  being  built  up  with  all  the  metres 
(viz.  with  the  A^>^andasya  bricks,  representing  the  metres,  cf.  VIII, 
3,  3,  I  seqq,),  would  thus  far  exceed  the  latter  number. 

"  ?  Thus  Sayawa :  /tityagnir  atiX7zanda  iti  yat  tena  sarva  ish/aka 
atiX7/andomayya  ity  uklam. 

^  That  is,  the  materials  used  for  making  bricks. 

[43]  C  C 


3 


86  5'ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 


Siidadohas  ;  and  the  food  which  is  in  the  metres 
is  the  earth-filhngs,  the  oblations,  and  the  fire-logs ; 
and  what  is  called  '  metres,'  that  is  the  space- 
filling (brick)  : — thus  this  comes  to  make  up  the 
whole  Agni ;  and  the  whole  Agni  comes  to  be 
the  space-filler  ;  and,  verily,  whosoever  knows  this, 
comes  to  be  that  whole  (Agni)  who  is  the  space-filler. 

9.  Now,  these  (amount  to)  twenty-one  Br/hatis ; 
and — the  heavenly  world  being  the  twenty-one-fold 
and  the  Brehati — this  (altar)  thus  comes  to  be  equal 
to  the  heavenly  world,  and  to  the  twenty-one-fold 
Stoma  and  the  Br/hati  metre. 

10.  But,  indeed,  that  Fire-altar  also  is  the  Year, — 
the  nights  are  its  enclosing-stones,  and  there  are 
three  hundred  and  sixty  of  these,  because  there 
are  three  hundred  and  sixty  nights  in  the  year  ;  and 
the  days  are  its  Ya^ushmati  bricks,  for  there  are 
three  hundred  and  sixty  of  these,  and  three  hundred 
and  sixty  days  in  the  year  ;  and  those  thirty-six 
bricks  which  are  over  ^  are  the  thirteenth  month, 
the  body  (of  the  year  and  the  altar),  the  half-months 
and  months, — (there  being)  twenty-four  half-months, 
and  twelve  months.  And  what  there  is  between 
day  and  night  that  is  the  Sudadohas ;  and  what 
food  there  is  in  the  days  and  nights  is  the  earth- 
fillings,  the  oblations,  and  the  fire-logs  ;  and  what 
is  called  '  days  and  nights '  that  constitutes  the 
space-filling  (brick) : — thus  this  comes  to  make  up 
the  whole  Agni,  and  the  whole  Agni  comes  to  be 
the  space-filler  ;  and,  verily,  whosoever  knows  this, 
thus  comes  to  be  that  whole  (Agni)  who  is  the 
space-filler. 

^  Viz.  those  required  to  make  up  the  756  Ya^ushmatts. 


X    KANDA,    5    ADHYAYA,    4    BRAHMAA^A,     1 3.       387 

11.  Now,  these  (amount  to)  twenty-one  Br/hatis ; 
and — the  heavenly  world  being  the  twenty-one-fold 
and  the  Brihati — this  (altar)  thus  comes  to  be  equal 
to  the  heavenly  world,  and  to  the  twenty-one-fold 
Stoma  and  the  Br/hati  metre. 

12.  But,  indeed,  that  Fire-altar  also  is  the  body, — 
the  bones  are  its  enclosing-stones,  and  there  are 
three  hundred  and  sixty  of  these,  because  there  are 
three  hundred  and  sixty  bones  in  man  ;  the  marrow 
parts  are  the  Ya^ushmati  bricks,  for  there  are  three 
hundred  and  sixty  of  these,  and  three  hundred  and 
sixty  parts  of  marrow  in  man  ;  and  those  thirty-six 
bricks  which  are  over,  are  the  thirteenth  month, 
the  trunk,  the  vital  air  (of  the  altar), — in  his  body 
there  are  thirty  parts  ^  in  his  feet  two,  in  his  vital 
airs  two,  and  in  his  head  two, — as  to  there  being 
two  of  these,  it  is  because  the  head  consists  of  two 
skull-bones.  And  that  whereby  these  joints  are 
held  together  is  the  Sudadohas  ;  and  those  three 
whereby  this  body  is  covered — to  wit,  hair,  skin, 
and  flesh — are  the  earth-fillings  ;  what  he  drinks  is 
the  oblations,  and  what  he  eats  the  fire-logs ;  and 
what  is  called  the  'body,'  that  is  the  space-filling 
(brick)  : — thus  this  comes  to  make  up  the  whole 
Agni,  and  the  whole  Agni  comes  to  be  the  space- 
filler  ;  and,  verily,  whosoever  knows  this,  thus  comes 
to  be  that  whole  (Agni)  who  is  the  space-filler. 

13.  Now,  these  (amount  to)  twenty-one  Brz'hatis  ; 
and — the  heavenly  world  being  the  twenty-one-fold 
and  the  B/z'hati — this  (altar)  thus  comes  to  be  equal 
to  the  heavenly  world,  and  to  the  twenty-one-fold 
Stoma  and  the  Br/hati  metre. 

'  See  p.  383,  note  3. 
c  c  2 


388  S-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

14.  But,  indeed,  that  built  Agni  (the  fire-altar) 
is  all  beings,  all  the  gods  ;  for  all  the  gods,  all  beings 
are  the  waters  ^  and  that  built  fire-altar  is  the  same 
as  those  waters  ^ ;— the  navigable  streams  (round 
the  sun)  are  its  enclosing-stones,  and  there  are 
three  hundred  and  sixty  of  these,  because  three 
hundred  and  sixty  navigable  streams  encircle  the 
sun  on  all  sides ;  and  the  navigable  streams,  indeed, 
are  also  the  Ya^ushmati  bricks,  and  there  are 
three  hundred  and  sixty  of  these,  because  three 
hundred  and  sixty  navigable  streams  flow  towards  ^ 
the  sun.  And  what  is  between  (each)  two  navigable 
rivers  is  the  Sudadohas ;  and  those  thirty-six  bricks 
which  remain  over  are  the  same  as  that  thirteenth 
month,  and  the  body  (of  this  altar,  the  waters  ^)  is 
the  same  as  this  gold  man. 

15.  His  feet  are  that  gold  plate  and  lotus-leaf — 
(that  is)  the  waters  and  the  sun's  orb  ^ — are  his  feet ; 
his  arms  are  the  two  spoons,  and  they  are  Indra 
and  Agni ;  the  two  naturally-perforated  (bricks) 
are  this  earth  and  the  air  ;  and  the  three  Vi^va^yotis 
(all-light)  bricks  are  these  deities — Agni,  Vayu,  and 


^  Viz.  inasmuch  as  they  are  the  foundation  and  ultimate  source 
of  the  universe;  cf.  VI,  8,  2,  2.  3;  and  everything  is  contained 
therein,  X,  5,  4,  3. 

^  Viz.  inasmuch  as  the  built  Agni  is  the  same  as  the  sun,  and  the 
sun  is  surrounded  by  water  ;  cf.  p.  368,  note  i. 

^  It  is  not  clear  whether  these  rivers  are  meant  to  be  different 
ones  from  those  flowing  round  the  sun,  or  whether  they  are  the 
same  as  'washing  against'  the  sun. 

*  Athokteshu  paryayeshv  agnyavayava  -  trayodajamasatmika 
atma  agnyatmana  dhyeyanam  apam  atmety  artha//.     Say. 

■'"'  That  is,  in  regard  to  the  sacrifice,  the  gold  plate  and  lotus-leaf 
are  his  feet,  and  in  regard  to  the  deity,  the  waters  and  the  sun's 
disk.     Say.     They  are,  nevertheless,  counted  as  four. 


X    KAiVnA,    5    ADHYAYA,    4    BRAIIMAA'A,     l6.       389 

Aditya,  for  these  deities,  indeed,  are  all  the  light ; 
and  the  twelve  seasonal  (bricks)  are  the  year,  the 
body  (of  the  altar,  and  the  gold  man) ;  and  the 
five  N^kasads  and  five  Pa;1/{'a/'udas  are  the  sacrifice, 
the  gods ;  and  the  Vikar;^i  the  (third)  Svayama- 
trinn^  and  the  variegated  stone  ^ ;  and  the  fire  which 
is  deposited  (on  the  altar  ^)  is  the  thirty-fifth  ;  and 
the  formula  of  the  Lokampr?;^a  (brick)  -  is  the  thirty- 
sixth  ; — that  (gold  man),  indeed,  the  body  (of  the 
altar)  is  the  end  of  everything  here  ^ :  he  is  in  the 
midst  of  all  the  waters,  endowed  with  all  objects 
of  desire — for  all  objects  of  desire  are  the  waters  "^ ; 
whilst  possessed  of  all  (objects  of)  desires  he  is 
without  desire,  for  no  desire  of  anything  (troubles) 
him  ^. 

16.  Regarding  this  there  is  this  verse — '  By  know- 
ledge*' they  ascend  that  (state)  where  desires  have 
vanished  '^ :  sacrificial  gifts  go  not  thither  ^  nor  the 
fervid  practisers  of  rites  without  knowledge  ; ' — for. 
indeed,  he  who  does  not  know  this  does  not  attain 
to  that  world  either  by  sacrificial  gifts  or  by  devout 


^  For  this  stone,  which  was  deposited  near  the  Agnidhriya  shed, 
and  afterwards  placed  in  the  Agnidhra  hearth,  see  p.  243,  note  2. 
2  See  VIII,  7,  2,  6.  '  See  X,  5,  2,  6-8. 

*  Sa  eva  .  .  .  sha/triw^adish/akamayo  hirawmaya/^  purusha  atma 
sarvabhfitadevatmanam  apam  agnyatmana  dhyeyanam  madhye  var- 

tate.    Say. 

**  Saya«a  does  not  explain  this  last  sentence. 

«  '  Only  by  knowledge  is  such  a  body  (self)  to  be  obtained  by 
all,  not  by  hundreds  of  religious  performances.'     Say. 

'  Yatra  svarupe  kama/^  sarve  paragata  v'wriil^h  (?  niw/iia//) 
svayam  akamam  ity  artha>^,  tad  atmasvarfipaw  vidyaya  svarupewa 
Srohanti  apnuvanti.    Say. 

*  Sayawa  takes  '  dakshiwa '  as  instrumental,  in  accordance  with 
the  comment  offered  by  the  Brahmawa,  which,  however,  is  probably 
not  meant  as  a  close  grammatical  explanation. 


n 


90  SATAPATHA-BRAHMA2VA. 


practices,   but  only   to   those  who   know  does   that 
world  belong. 

1 7.  The  welkin  is  the  earth-fillings  (between  the 
layers  of  brick) ;  the  moon  the  oblations  ;  the  Nak- 
shatras  (lunar  mansions)  the  fire-logs, — because  the 
moon  resides  in  (or  with)  the  Nakshatra,  therefore 
the  oblation  resides  in  the  fire-wood  :  that  \  indeed, 
is  the  food  of  the  oblation,  and  its  support ;  whence 
the  oblation  does  not  fail  (na  kshiyate),  for  that  is  its 
food  and  its  support.  And  what  are  called  '  the 
gods '  they  are  the  space-filling  (brick) ;  for  by 
(naming)  the  gods  everything  here  is  named. 

18.  It  is  regarding  this  that  it  is  said  by  the  J^z'k 
(X,  12,  3),  'The  All-gods  have  gone  after  this  thy 
Ya^us,' — for  all  beings,  all  the  gods,  indeed,  become 
the  Ya^us  here.  Thus  this  whole  Agni  comes  to 
be  the  space-filler  ;  and,  verily,  whosoever  knows 
this,  thus  comes  to  be  that  whole  (Agni)  who  is  the 
space-filler. 

19.  Now,  these  (amount  to)  twenty-one  Br/hatis ; 
and — the  heavenly  world  being  the  twenty-one-fold 
and  the  B7^?hati — this  (altar)  thus  comes  to  be  equal 
to  the  heavenly  world,  and  to  the  twenty-one-fold 
Stoma  and  the  Br/hati  metre. 

Fifth    Brahmajva. 

I.  Kui-ri  Va^a^ravasa  ^  once  built  a  fire-altar. 
Suj-ravas  Kaushya  then  said  to  him,  'Gautama, 
when  thou  wert  just  now  building  up  Agni,  didst 
thou  build  him  with  his  face  forward,  or  backward, 
or  downward,  or  upward  ? 

'  Viz.  the   staying   (of  the  moon)  in,  or  with,  the  Nakshatras, 
whose  name  is  then  made  use  of  for  a  fanciful  etymology. 
^  That  is,  Kuj-ri  Gautama,  (son  and)  disciple  of  Va^a^ravas. 


X    KANDA,    5    ADHYAYA,    5    BRAHMAA'A,   7.  39 1 

2.  '  If  perchance  thou  hast  built  him  looking  for- 
ward, it  would  be  just  as  if  one  were  to  offer  food 
from  behind  to  one  sitting  with  averted  face  ^ :  he 
thereby  will  not  receive  thy  offering. 

3.  'And  if  thou  hast  built  him  looking  back- 
ward, wherefore,  then,  hast  thou  made  him  a  tail 
behind  ? 

4.  *  And  if  thou  hast  built  him  with  his  face  down- 
ward, it  would  be  just  as  if  one  were  to  put  food  on 
the  back  of  one  lying  with  his  face  downward  :  he 
surely  will  not  receive  thy  offering. 

5.  '  And  if  thou  hast  built  him  with  his  face  up- 
ward— surely,  a  bird  does  not  fly  towards  heaven 
with  its  face  turned  upward  ^ :  he  will  not  carry 
thee  to  heaven,  he  will  not  become  conducive  to 
heaven  for  thee.' 

6.  He  said,  '  I  have  built  him  with  his  face  for- 
ward ;  I  have  built  him  with  his  face  backward  ; 
I  have  built  him  with  his  face  downward ;  I  have 
built  him  with  his  face  upward  :  I  have  built  him  in 
all  directions.' 

7.  When  he  lays  down  the  (gold)  man  with  his 
head  forw^ard  (eastward),  and  the  two  spoons  (with 
their  bowls)  forward  ^  thereby  he  (Agni)  is  built 
looking  forward  ;  and  when  he  lays  down  the  tor- 

^  The  oblations  are  oflfered  by  the  Adhvaryu  whilst  standing 
south,  or  south-west,  of  the  fire,  with  his  face  turned  towards  north- 
east,-— hence  Agni,  looking  eastwards,  would  not  see  the  food 
offered  him. 

^  Yady  agnir  uttanaj  X-itas  tarhi  yatha  uttanaw  vaya^  pakshi 
svayam  akajam  utpatitu/?z  na  jaknoti  kim  utanyaw  purusha//? 
dvabhya/w  pakshabhya»z  grzhitvotpatituw  na  jakta  iti  .  .  .  tva;« 
X'itavanta7«  svargaw  lokaw  prapayituw  na  jaknoty  uttana  X'ayanad  ity 
artha/^ ;  abhivakshyatiti  vaha^  prapawe  \n'/i  syapratyaye  rOpam.  Say. 

'  See  VII,  4,  I,  15.  16. 


J 


92  S'ATAPATHA-BRAHMA.VA. 


toise  ^  with  its  head  backward  (westward),  and  the 
victims'  heads  turned  backward,  thereby  he  is  built 
looking  backward ;  and  when  he  lays  down  the 
tortoise  with  its  face  downward,  and  the  victims' 
heads  with  their  faces  downward,  and  the  bricks 
with  their  faces  downward  -,  thereby  he  is  built 
looking  downward ;  and  when  he  lays  down  the 
(gold)  man  with  his  face  upward,  and  the  two 
spoons  (with  their  open  bowls)  turned  upward,  and 
the  mortar  turned  upward,  and  the  fire-pan  turned 
upward,  thereby  he  is  built  looking  upward ;  and 
when  he  lays  down  the  bricks  whilst  moving  round 
(the  altar)  in  every  direction,  thereby  he  is  built 
(looking)  in  all  directions. 

8.  Now,  the  Koshas,  whilst  driving  about,  once 
drove  up  ^  to  an  Agni  with  his  head  pulled  out  ^ 
One  of  them  said,  '  The  head  (i-iras)  means  ex- 
cellence (m)  :  he  has  pulled  out  his  excellence,  he 
will  be  deprived  of  his  all ! '  and  so  indeed  it  hap- 
pened to  him. 

9.  And  another  said,  '  The  head  means  the  vital 
airs  :  he  has  pulled  out  his  vital  airs,  he  will  quickly 
go  to  yonder  world ! '  and  so,  indeed,  it  happened 
to  him. 


>  See  VII,  5,  I,  I. 

^  Ish/akanawz  nUhvenopzdhamm  nama  r?l§^ulekhadakshi«apasa- 
vyatryalikhitadilekhanam  uparibhage  darjanam.  Say.  The  broad 
side  of  the  bricks  not  marked  with  lines  is  thus  looked  upon  as 
their  face. 

^  That  is  to  say,  according  to  Sayawa,  whilst  going  about  officiat- 
ing at  sacrifices,  they  built  the  altar  in  that  way  at  some  one's 
house. 

*  That  is,  with  a  head  built  on  to  the  altar  on  the  front  side  of  the 
body ;  see  the  diagram  of  the  .ryena/^iti  in  Burnell's  Cat.  of  Vedic 
MSS.  (1870),  p.  29. 


X   KANDA,    6    ADIIYAYA,     I    BRAHMAiVA,    2.  393 

10.  Upwards,  indeed,  he  (Agni)  is  built  up,  to 
wit,  (in  the  shape  of)  the  grass-bunch,  the  clod-bricks, 
the  lotus-leaf,  the  gold  plate  and  man,  the  two 
spoons,  the  naturally-perforated  one,  the  grass-brick, 
the  Dviya^^us,  the  two  Reta/^si/l',  the  Visva^yotis,  the 
two  seasonal  bricks,  the  Ashart7/a,  and  the  tortoise ; 
and  that  fire  which  is  placed  on  the  altar-pile, 
assuredly,  is  then  most  manifestly  his  (Agni's)  head  : 
let  him  therefore  not  pull  out  (the  head). 

Sixth  Adhyaya.      First  Brahmaata. 

1.  Now  at  the  house  of  Aru;^a  Aupavei'i^  these 
came  once  together, — Satyaya^;7a  Paulushi,  Ma- 
ha^ala  Cabala,  Bu^T^ila  Aj-vatara^vi,  Indra- 
dyiimna  Bhallaveya,  and  C^anai'arkarakshya. 
They  took  counsel  together  regarding  (Agni)  Vai^- 
vanara,  but  did  not  agree  as  to  Vaii"vanara  ^. 

2.  They  said,  'There  is  that  Ai-vapati  Kaikeya 
who  knows  Vaii^vanara  thoroughly^:  let  us  go  to  him!' 
They  went  to  Ai^vapati  Kaikeya.  He  ordered  for 
them  separate  dwellings,  separate  honours,  separate 
Soma-sacrifices  each  with  a  thousand  gifts.  In  the 
morning,  still   at  variance  with    one   another,   they 

^  XMndogyop.  V,  11,  where  another  version  of  this  story  occurs, 
has  here  tlie  name  of  Aruwa's  son,  Uddalaka  Aruwi ;  and,  instead 
of  Mahajala  G^abala,  it  has  PraX'inajala  Aupamanya. 

^  Sayawa  takes  this  to  mean,  '  he  (Aru«a)  was  unable  to  instruct 
them  in  regard  to  Vai^vanara,' — so-^ruwas  teshaw  satyaya^wadina/w 
pa/7/tana?«  vaijvanaravidyawz  bodhayituw  na  samiyaya  sawgata// 
jakto  nabhavat, — probably,  however,  '  samiyaya '  is  better  taken 
impersonally  ('  there  was  no  agreement  between  them '),  as  is  done 
by  the  St.  Petersb.  Diet. ;  though  AV/and.  XI,  3  favours  Sayawa's 
view. 

^  Saya«a  takes  '  samprati '  in  its  ordinary  sense  of  *  now/  The 
knowledge  of  Vaijvanara  implied  here,  according  to  Sdyawa,  means 
the  knowledge  of  the  supreme  deity  (paramejvara). 


394  ^-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

came  again  to  him,  with  fuel  in  their  hands  \  saying, 
'  We  want  to  become  thy  pupils.' 

3.  He  said,  '  How  is  this,  venerable  sirs,  when  ye 
are  learned  in  the  scriptures,  and  sons  of  men 
learned  in  the  scriptures  ? '  They  replied,  'Venerable 
sir,  thou  knowest  Vai^vanara  thoroughly :  teach  us 
him ! '  He  said,  '  I  do  indeed  know  Vaii'vanara 
thoroughly :  put  your  fuel  on  (the  fire),  ye  are 
become  my  pupils  ^Z 

4.  He  then  said  to  Aru;/a  x^upavei-i, '  O  Gautama, 
as  whom  knowest  thou  Vai^vanara  ^  ?  ' — '  As  Earth 
only,  O  king ;  '  he  replied. — '  Yea,'  he  said,  '  that 
indeed  is  Vai^vanara,  the  foundation  ;  and  because 
thou  knowest  the  Vai^vanara  Foundation  (pratish/Z/a) 
therefore  thou  art  firmly  established  (pratish//nta) 
with  offspring  and  cattle  ;  and,  verily,  he  who 
knows  that  Vai^vanara  Foundation,  repels  Death 
and  attains  all  life.  But,  in  truth,  these  are  only 
the  feet  *  of  Vaii-vanara,  and  thy  feet  would  have 
withered  away,  hadst  thou  not  come  hither ;  or  the 
feet  would  be  unknown  to  thee,  hadst  thou  not 
come  hither  \' 

5.  He  then  said  to  Satyaya^;^a  Paulushi,  '  O 
Pra/('inayogya,  as  whom  knowest  thou  Vai^vanara  ? ' 

^  That  is,  in  the  way  in  which  pupils  approach  their  teacher. 

^  Literally,  '  Ye  have  entered  (my  tuition) ; '  upeta  stha  upasina 
bhavatha.     Say. 

^  Or,  perhaps,  '  what  Vaijvanara  knowest  thou  ? ' 

*  'Pratish/M'  (rest,  foundation)  also  commonly  means  'the 
feet.' 

'  It  is  not  quite  clear  whether  the  words  '  or  the  feet,  &c.'  really 
(as  Sayawa  takes  them)  form  part  of  the  king's  speech,  or  whether 
they  are  merely  meant  as  explanatory  of  the  latter  part  of  the  king's 
remarks.  If  Saya«a  be  right,  the  words  '  the  feet  would  be  unknown 
by  thee,'  seem  to  admit  of  a  double  meaning,  viz.  '  thou  wouldst 


X    KANDA,    6    ADIIYAYA,    T    BRAIIMAiVA,    J.         395 

— '  As  Water  only,  O  king  ; '  he  replied. — '  Yea,'  he 
said,  '  that  indeed  is  the  Vaii-vanara  Wealth  ;  and 
because  thou  knowest  that  Vai^svanara  Wealth, 
therefore  thou  art  wealthy  and  prosperous ;  and, 
verily,  he  who  knows  that  Vai^vanara  Wealth, 
repels  death  and  attains  all  life.  But,  in  truth,  this 
is  only  the  bladder  of  Vai^vanara,  and  thy  bladder 
would  have  failed  thee,  hadst  thou  not  come  hither  ; 
or  the  bladder  w^ould  be  unknown  to  thee,  hadst 
thou  not  come  hither.' 

6.  He  then  said  to  Maha^ala  (Cabala,  '  O  Aupa- 
manyava,  as  whom  knowest  thou  Vai^vanara  ? ' — 
'  As  Ether  only,  O  king,'  he  replied. — '  Yea,'  he 
said,  '  that,  indeed,  is  the  Vai^vanara  Plenteous ; 
and  because  thou  knowest  Vai^vanara  Plenteous, 
therefore  thou  art  plentiful  in  offspring  and  cattle  ; 
and,  verily,  he  who  knows  that  Vai^vanara  Plenteous, 
repels  death  and  attains  all  life.  But,  in  truth,  this 
is  only  the  trunk  of  Vai^vanara,  and  thy  trunk  would 
have  failed  thee,  hadst  thou  not  come  hither  ;  or 
the  body  would  be  unknown  to  thee,  hadst  thou  not 
come  hither.' 

7.  He  then  said  to  Budila  A^vatara^vi,  '  O  Vaiya- 
ghrapadya,  as  whom  knowest  thou  Vai^vanara  ?  ' — 
'  As  Air  (wind)  only,  O  king  ;'  he  replied. — '  Yea,'  he 


have  become  footless,'  or  '  not  even  Vaijvanara's  feet  would  have 
been  known  by  thee;'  though  in  the  latter  sense  some  particle 
such  as  'eva'  might  have  been  expected.  Sayawa,  however,  seems 
10  take  these  words  in  yet  another  sense  (if,  indeed,  he  had  not 
another  reading  before  him), — vaijvanarasya^«anat  padau  te  tava 
viparitagrahiwo  amlasyatam  amlanau  gamanasamarthav  abhavishy- 
ataw  yadi  tnam  nagamishya// ;  itlhaw  doshaparyavasanayuktam 
ekadeja^/7anam  eva  nava^esha  ity  aha,  padau  te  viditav  iti  vaijva- 
naras}a  padamatra;//  tvaya  vidila/;/  na  tu  k/-/tsno  vai^vanara/i ;  ata/; 
sadhv  akarshir  yat  tvam  agato^sity  abhipraya/i. 


396  i-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

said,  '  that  indeed  is  the  Vai^vanara  of  divers 
courses  ;  and  because  thou  knowest  that  Vaii"vanara 
of  divers  courses,  therefore  divers  rows  of  cars 
follow  thee ;  and,  verily,  he  who  knows  that  Vaii"- 
vanara  of  divers  courses,  repels  death,  and  attains 
all  life.  But.  in  truth,  this  is  only  the  breath  of 
Vaij-vanara,  and  thy  breath  would  have  failed  thee, 
hadst  thou  not  come  hither ;  or  the  breath  would 
be  unknown  to  thee,  hadst  thou  not  come  hither.' 

8.  He  then  said  to  Indradyumna  Bhallaveya, 
'  O  Vaiyaghrapadya,  as  whom  knowest  thou  Va.is- 
vanara  ? ' — '  As  Sun  only,  O  king,'  he  replied. — 
'  Yea,'  he  said,  '  that  indeed  is  the  Vai^vanara  of 
Soma's  splendour  ^ ;  and  because  thou  knowest  the 
Vai^vanara  of  Soma's  splendour,  therefore  that  Soma- 
juice  never  fails  to  be  consumed  and  cooked  '^  in  thy 
house  ;  and,  verily,  he  who  knows  that  Vaii"vanara 
of  Soma's  splendour,  repels  death,  and  attains  all 
life.  But,  indeed,  this  is  only  the  eye  of  Vai^vanara, 
and  thine  eye  would  have  failed  thee,  hadst  thou 
not  come  hither ;  or  the  eye  would  be  unknown  to 
thee,  hadst  thou  not  come  hither.' 

9.  He  then  said  to  6*ana  ^'arkarakshya,  '  O 
Sayavasa,  as  whom  knowest  thou  Vaii"vanara  ? ' — 
'  As  Heaven  only,  O  king,'  he  replied. — ■'  Yea,'  he 
said,  '  that  indeed  is  Vai^vanara  Pre-eminence ;  and 
because  thou  knowest  the  Vai^vanara  Pre-eminence, 
therefore  thou  art  pre-eminent  among  thine  equals ; 
and,   verily,   he   who    knows    that  Vaii"vanara   Pre- 

'  Or,  perhaps  better, '  of  Soma's  fire.'  The  AVzandogya-upanishad 
has  •  Sute^as  {of  beautiful  splendour,  or  light),'  instead  of  '  suta- 
te^as.' 

2  According  to  Saya«a,  this  refers  to  the  cooking,  or  baking,  of 
the  cakes  (puroc/a^a)  connected  with  the  Soma-sacrifice. 


X    KAA'DA,    6    ADHYAYA,     I    BRAHMAiVA,     II.  39/ 


eminence  repels  death,  and  attains  all  life.  But, 
indeed,  this  is  only  the  head  of  Vai^vanara,  and 
thy  head  would  have  failed  thee,  hadst  thou  not 
come  hither  ;  or  the  head  would  have  been  unknown 
to  thee,  hadst  thou  not  come  hither.' 

10.  He  said  to  them,  'Ye  then,  knowing  different 
Vai^vanaras,  have  been  feeding  on  different  kinds 
of  food  ;  but  verily,  the  well-beknown  gods  have 
attained,  as  it  were,  the  measure  of  a  span '  ;  but 
I  will  so  tell  them  unto  you  that  I  shall  make 
them  attain  no  more  nor  less  than  the  measure  of 
a  span.' 

1 1.  Pointing  at  the  head  he  said,  'This,  indeed,  is 
the  Vai-yvanara  Pre-eminence  ;' — pointing  at  the  eyes 
he  said, 'This,  indeed,  is  the  Yai^vanara  of  Soma's 
splendour  ; ' — pointing  at  the  nostrils  he  said,  'This, 
indeed,  is  the  Vai^vanara  of  divers  courses  ; ' — 
pointing  at  the  space  in  the  mouth  he  said,  '  This, 
indeed,  is  the  Vai^vanara  Plenteous;' — pointing  at 
the  water  in  the  mouth  he  said,  '  This,  indeed,  is 
the  Vai-s-vanara  Wealth  ; ' — pointing  at  the  chin  he 
said,  '  This,  indeed,  is  the  Vai^vanara  Foundation.' 

*  Saya«a  apparently  takes  this  thus :  but  the  gods,  knowing  well 
that  (essential  element)  which  is  merely  of  the  space  of  a  span,  have 
become  successful ; — yat  tv  evaw  yathoklavayavai//  p/7ihi\  ipadadibhir 
dyumurdhantair  avayavair  vi^ish/am  ekaw  vastu  tat  prade^amatraw 
pradej-apramawam  iva  deva-^  suvidita/i  samyag  ^watavanto  «  bhisam- 
panna/^  piaptaphala  babhfivur  ity  artha/^.  Though  this  interpre- 
tation looks  very  plausible,  the  accent  of  '  siividita '  would  scarcely 
admit  of  the  word  being  taken  as  a  bahuvrihi  compound.  In  the 
■words  which  follow,  Sa^az/a  takes  'them  (enan)'  to  refer  to  the 
bodily  parts  of  Vaijvanara,  identified  with  the  imperfect  doctrines  of 
the  king's  disciples.  It  is,  indeed,  quite  possible  that  '  the  gods ' 
are  here  identified  with  the  special  Vai.rvanaras,  the  unity  of  whom, 
in  the  one  Puiusha,  or  Atman  (self),  the  Brahmawa  endeavours  to 
inculcate. 


398  5ATAPATHA-BRAHMAA^A. 

This  Agni  Vaii'vanara  is  no  other  than  the  Purusha  ; 
and,  verily,  whosoever  thus  knows  that  Agni  Va'is- 
vanara  as  Purusha-hke,  as  estabhshed  within  the 
Purusha,  repels  death,  and  attains  all  life ;  and, 
verily,  Vai^-vanara  does  no  harm  to  him  that  speaks 
of  him. 

Second  Brahmaa^a. 

1.  Now,  indeed,  there  is  this  twofold  thing,  to  wit, 
the  eater  and  that  which  is  eaten  ^  ;  and  when  this 
pair  meets  it  is  called  the  eater,  and  not  the  eaten. 

2.  Now  that  eater  is  the  same  as  this  Agni  (the 
fire  and  fire-altar)  ;  and  whatever  they  assign  to  him 
is  his  assignments  ;  and  these  assignments  (ahiti)  are 
mystically  called  oblations  (ahuti),  for  the  gods  love 
the  mystic. 

3.  And  the  eater,  doubtless,  is  the  sun,  and  his 
assignments  (offerings)  are  the  moon,  for  the  moon 
is  assigned  to  the  sun  ^.     Thus  much  as  to  the  deity. 

4.  Now  as  to  the  body.  The  eater,  doubtless,  is 
the  breath,  and  its  assignments  are  food,  for  the  food 
is  consigned  to  (the  channel  of)  the  breath.  Thus 
much  as  to  Agni. 

5.  Now  as  to  the  Arka  (flame).  The  Arka,  doubt- 
less, is  Agni ;  and  his  joy  are  the  oblations,  for  the 
oblations  are  a  joy  ^  to  Agni. 

-  Or,  as  Sayawa  takes  it, — this  (world)  is  twofold,  the  eater  and 
the  eaten. 

^  The  moon  here  would  seem  to  be  considered  as  serving  for 
food  to  the  sun,  as  it  does  to  the  gods.  The  commentary  is  not 
very  explicit  on  this  point, — tas/'yahutaya^'  (!)  >^andrama//  y^andra- 
masa7«  hy  aditya  adadhatity  anena  ^'andramasa  aditye  adhanad 
adhititvaw  pratipaditam. 

^  '  Kam '  is  used  adverbially  '  well,' — they  do  him  good,  they 
please  him. 


X    KANDA,    6    ADHYAYA,    2    BRAIIMAA'A,     II.        399 

6.  And  the  Arka,  doubtless,  is  the  sun  ;  and  his 
joy  is  the  moon,  for  the  moon  is  a  joy  to  the  sun. 
Thus  much  as  to  the  deity. 

7.  Now  as  to  the  body.  The  Arka,  doubtless, 
is  the  breath,  and  his  joy  is  food,  for  food  is  a  joy 
to  (the  channel  of)  the  breath.  Thus  much  as  to 
the  Arka. 

8.  Now  as  to  the  Uktha  (song  of  praise).  The 
*  uk,'  doubtless,  is  Agni,  and  his  '  tham  '  is  oblations, 
for  by  oblations  Agni  rises  (ut-tha,  i.  e.  blazes  up). 

9.  And  the  '  uk,'  doubtless,  is  the  sun,  and  his 
'  tham  '  is  the  moon,  for  by  the  moon  the  sun  rises. 
Thus  much  as  to  the  deity. 

10.  Now  as  to  the  body.  The  *  uk,'  doubtless,  is 
the  breath,  and  the  'tham'  is  food,  for  by  food  the 
breath  rises  (increases).  Thus  much  as  to  the  Uktha. 
That  Agni-like,  Arka-like,  Uktha-like  one  is  the 
same  as  the  Purusha  ;  and,  verily,  the  enemy  withers 
away  of  whosoever,  knowing  this,  thus  serves  that 
Agni-like,  Arka-like,  Uktha-like  Purusha. 

11.  The  fire,  indeed,  is  kindled  by  the  breath, 
the  wind  by  the  fire,  the  sun  by  the  wind,  the  moon 
by  the  sun,  the  stars  by  the  moon,  and  the  lightning 
by  the  stars  ^  : — so  great,  indeed,  is  the  kindling  both 
in  this  and  in  yonder  world  ;  and,  verily,  whosoever 
knows  this  is  enkindled  to  that  full  extent  both  in 
this  and  in  yonder  world. 


'  Agnir  prawena  dipyate,  prawavayor  abhave  alpatve  agner 
dipanaw  nasti ;  agnina  vayur  dipyate  vayunadiiyo  ^  vash/ambhama- 
trewa  tad  dipanam ;  adityena  /^andrama^  prabhaw^o  ^^yoti//jastra- 
siddha/z ;  ratrau  nakshatiawi  X-andramasa  prakajante  diva  hi  mahatta- 
ic//a  sflryaprakajena  tirobhiitatvan  na  tada  prakai'a^ ;  nakshairair 
vidyut  prakiuyatc.     Say. 


400  s-atapatha-brahmaiva. 

Third  Brahmana. 

1.  Let  him  meditate  upon  the  'true  Brahman.' 
Now,  man  here,  indeed,  is  possessed  of  under- 
standing \  and  according  to  how  great  his  under- 
standing is  when  he  departs  this  world,  so  does  he, 
on  passing  away,  enter  yonder  world. 

2.  Let  him  meditate  on  the  Self,  which  is  made 
up  of  intelligence,  and  endowed  with  a  body  of 
spirit,  with  a  form  of  light,  and  with  an  etherial 
nature,  which  changes  its  shape  at  will,  is  swift 
as  thought,  of  true  resolve,  and  true  purpose,  which 
consists  of  all  sweet  odours  and  tastes,  which  holds 
sway  over  all  the  regions  and  pervades  this  whole 
universe,  which  is  speechless  and  indifferent  ^  ; — 
even  as  a  grain  of  rice,  or  a  grain  of  barley,  or  a 
grain  of  millet,  or  the  smallest  granule  of  millet,  so 
is  this  orolden  ^  Purusha  in  the  heart ;  even  as  a 
smokeless  light,  it  is  greater  than  the  sky,  greater 
than  the  ether,  greater  than  the  earth,  greater  than 
all  existing  things  ; — -that  self  of  the  spirit  (breath) 
is  my  self:  on  passing  away  from  hence  I  shall 
obtain  that  self.  Verily,  whosoever  has  this  trust  *, 
for  him  there  is  no  uncertainty.  Thus  spake 
.S'a?^^ilya,  and  so  it  is  ^ 

^  Or,  will,  purpose, — kratumaya//,  kratur  nu/ca.yo  v  dhyavasaya 
evam  eva  nanyathety  avivakshitapratyaya/;,  tadatmako  :>:ya;«  purusho 
g\\ci/i.  For  this  chapter  (the  .Sa^is'ilyavidya)  see  A'^andogyop.  Ill, 
14  ('  man  is  a  creature  of  will,'  Prof.  Max  Miiller). 

^  Anadaram  asambhramam  (without  mental  affects).    Say. 

^  That  is,  of  the  brilliance  of  gold  (suvarwasamanate^a,;^).    Say. 

*  Or,  thought,  knowledge  (buddhi/z),  as  Sayawa  supplies. 

^  Sayawa  takes  this  along  with  '  so  spake  Sd.fidi\y^,' — ity  evam 
etad  aha  sma  uktavan  sandWyo  namarshir  iti.  The  final  '  iti '  seems 
to  be  intended  to  indicate  that  Sa.ndi\ya.'s  opinion  is  adopted  by  the 
Brahmawa. 


X    KAA'DA,    6    ADIIYAYA,    4    BRAHMAiVA,     I.         4OI 


Fourth  Braiima.va. 

I.  Verily,  the  dawn  is  the  head  of  the  sacrificial 
horse  ^  the  sun  its  eye,  the  wind  its  breath,  Agni 
Vai^vanara  (the  fire  belonging  to  all  men)  its  open 
mouth.  The  year  is  the  body  of  the  sacrificial 
horse,  the  sky  its  back,  the  air  its  belly,  the  earth 
the  under  part  of  its  belly,  the  quarters  its  flanks, 
the  intermediate  quarters  its  ribs,  the  seasons  its 
limbs,  the  months  and  half-months  its  joints,  the 
days  and  nights  its  feet,  the  stars  its  bones,  the 
welkin  its  flesh,  the  sand  its  intestinal  food,  the 
rivers  its  bowels,  the  mountains  its  liver  and  lungs, 
the  herbs  and  trees  its  hair,  the  rising  sun  the 
forepart,  and  the  setting  sun  the  hindpart  of  its 
body,  the  lightning  its  yawning,  the  thundering  its 
whinnying,  the  raining  its  voiding  urine,  and  speech 
its  voice.  The  day,  indeed,  was  produced  as  the 
Mahiman  ^  (cup)  before  the  horse,  and  its  birth- 
place is  in  the  eastern  sea.  The  night  was  produced 
as  the  Mahiman  (cup)  behind  (or  after)  it,  and  its 
birth-place  was  in  the  western  sea  :  these  two  Ma- 
himan (cups),  indeed,  came  to  be  on  both  sides  of 
the  horse.  As  Haya  (steed)  it  carried  the  gods,  as 
Va^in  (racer)  the  Gandharvas,  as  Arvan  (courser) 
the  Asuras,  as  A^va  (horse)  men.  The  sea,  indeed, 
is  its  kindred,  the  sea  its  birth-place. 


^  That  is,  of  Pra^apati,  in  the  form  of  a  horse.  For  this  and 
the  next  chapters  see  the  beginning  of  the  Kawva  recension  of  the 
Er/had-arawyakopanishad. 

2  This  is  the  name  of  two  gold  cups  used  at  the  A^vamedha ;  cf. 
XIll,  2,  II,  I  seq. ;  5,  2,  23. 


[43]  ^  ^ 


402  fi-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

Fifth  Brahmajva. 

1.  Verily,  there  was  nothing  here  in  the  beginning: 
by  Death  this  (universe)  was  covered,  by  hunger, 
for  Death  is  hunger.  He  created  for  himself  this 
mind,  thinking,  '  May  I  have  a  soul'  He  went  on 
worshipping.  Whilst  he  was  worshipping  the  waters 
were  produced.  '  Verily,  to  me  worshipping  [ar/c) 
water  (kam)  has  been  produced,'  thus  (he  thought)  : 
this,  indeed,  is  the  Arka-nature  of  the  Arkya^;  and, 
verily,  there  is  joy  (kam)  for  him  who  thus  knows 
the  Arka-nature  of  the  Arkya. 

2.  The  Arka,  doubtless,  is  the  waters  ;  and  the 
cream  (froth)  which  was  on  the  waters  was  com- 
pacted, and  became  this  earth.  Thereon  he  wearied 
himself,  and  the  glow  and  essence  (sweat)  of  him 
thus  wearied  and  heated  developed  into  Fire. 

3.  He  made  himself  threefold — (Agni  being  one- 
third),  Aditya  one-third,  and  Vayu  one-third  :  that 
is  this  threefold  breath.  The  eastern  quarter  was 
his  head,  this  and  that  (intermediate  quarters)  are 
his  fore-feet,  the  western  quarter  his  tail,  this  and 
that  (intermediate  quarters)  his  thighs,  the  southern 
and  northern  quarters  his  flanks  ;  the  sky  his  back, 
the  air  his  belly,  and  this  (earth)  his  chest : — on  the 
waters  he  was  established  any  and  everywhere,  and 
so  indeed  is  he  established  who  knows  this. 

4.  He  desired,  '  May  a  second  self  be  produced 
for  me.'  By  his  mind  he  entered  into  union 
with  speech, — (to  wit)  Death  with  hunger  :  the  seed 
which  was  produced  became  the  year,  for  theretofore 
there  was  no  year.  For  as  long  as  the  year  he 
(Death)  carried  him  (within  him),  and  at  the  end  of 

^  See  X,  3,  4,  3  seq.;  4,  i,  4.  15.  21  seq. 


X    KAA^DA,    6    ADIIYAVA,    5    BRAIIMAiVA,   7.  403 

that  time  he  produced  him  \  He  opened  his  mouth 
(to  devour)  the  new-born  one,  and  he  (the  child) 
cried  '  bhaw  '  ;  thus  speech  was  produced. 

5.  He  bethought  him,  '  Surely,  if  I  kill  him, 
I  shall  gain  but  little  food  -.'  By  that  speech  and 
that  soul  of  his  he  created  all  this  (universe)  whatso- 
ever there  is, — Rik  (hymn-verses),  Ya^us  (formulas), 
Saman  (hymn-tunes),  metres,  sacrifices,  men,  and 
beasts.  And  whatsoever  he  created  he  set  about 
devouring ;  and  because  he  eats  (ad)  everything, 
hence  the  name  'Aditi';  and,  verily,  he  who  thus 
knows  the  nature  of  Aditi  becomes  an  eater  of 
everything,  and  all  food  becomes  his. 

6.  He  desired,  '  May  I  again  sacrifice  by  yet 
another  sacrifice.'  He  wearied  himself  and  practised 
austerity.  From  him,  thus  wearied  and  heated, 
glory  and  vigour  departed  ;  and  glory  and  vigour, 
indeed,  are  the  vital  airs.  The  vital  airs  having 
departed,  that  body  of  his  began  to  swell.  The 
mind  was  yet  in  the  body  ; — ■ 

7.  He  desired,  '  May  this  (body)  of  mine  be 
sacrificially  pure :  may  I  thereby  be  possessed  of 
a  self!'  Thereupon  the  horse  (ajva)  was  produced; 
and  because  that  which  was  swelling  ^  (ai"vat)  became 
pure  (medhya)  therefore  the  name  Ai^vamedha  (be- 
longs to  that  sacrifice).  He,  indeed,  knows  the 
A^vamedha  who  thus  knows  him  *. 


^  Viz.  Pra^g'apati,  the  year ;  Agni,  the  Purusha,  the  Self. 

^  Or,  I  shall  lessen  my  food  (which  would  have  become  more 
abundant  if  the  child  had  been  allowed  to  live  and  grow). 

^  The  commentaries  on  the  BnTiad-arawyakop.  take  this  together 
with  the  preceding  clause, — and  because  that  (body)  was  swelling 
(ajvat),  therefore  the  horse  (aj-va)  was  produced. 

*  Viz.  Agni-Pra^apati,  or  Death,  in  the  form  of  the  horse. 

D  d  2 


404  S-ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

8.  He  bethought  him  of  leaving  it  unrestrained  ^ 
At  the  end  of  a  year  he  slaughtered  it  for  his 
own  self,  and  made  over  the  (sacrificial)  animals  to 
the  deities  :  therefore  they  slaughter  the  consecrated 
(victim)  as  one  that,  in  its  nature  as  Pra^apati, 
represents  all  the  deities.  But  the  A^vamedha,  in 
truth,  is  he  that  shines  yonder  (the  sun),  and  the 
year  is  his  body.  The  Arka  is  this  Fire,  and  these 
worlds  are  his  bodies.  These  two  are  the  Arka 
and  A^vamedha ;  but  these,  indeed,  become  again 
one  deity,  to  wit,  Death.  And,  verily,  whosoever 
knows  this,  conquers  recurrent  Death,  and  Death  has 
no  hold  on  him  :  Death  is  his  own  self;  he  attains 
all  life,  and  becomes  one  of  those  deities. 

9.  Now  the  line  of  succession  (of  teachers).  The 
same  as  far  as  Sa;;^c>-iviputra.  Sa/^^^iviputra  (received 
it)  from  Mandukayam,  Ma;/^ukayani  from  Md.nda.vya, 
Mandavya  from  Kautsa,  Kautsa  from  Mahitthi, 
Mahitthi  from  Vamakakshaya;/a,  Vamakakshaya;2a 
from  Vatsya,  Vatsya  from  Sandilya,  Sa/idilya  from 
Ku^ri,  Kusn  from  Ya^'nava^as  Ra^astambayana, 
Ya^i^ava/^as  Ra^astambayana  from  Tura  Kavasheya, 
Tura  Kivasheya  from  Pra^apati,  Pra^apati  from 
Brahman  (n.).  Brahman  is  the  self-existent :  rever- 
ence be  to  Brahman ! 

^  For  the  construction,  see  IX,  5,  i,  35 ;  on  the  negative  form  of 
the  gerund  (tarn  anavarudhyaivamanyata)  with  a  direct  object,  see 
Pelbriick,  Altindische  Syntax,  §  264. 


CORRECTIONS. 

Page  66,  1.  ii,  and  note  i.  The  Aatush/oma  is  such  an  arrangement  of  the 
Stotras  of  a  Soma-sacrifice  in  which  the  Stomas  (or  hymn-forms)  em- 
ployed increase  successively  by  four  syllables.  See  notes  on  XI,  5,  2,  y ; 
Xlir,  3,  r,  4(sic!). 

P.  279,  line  7.  Perhaps  this  passage  had  better  be  translated  thus, — And  he 
who,  without  having  performed  these  (rites),  should  officiate  even  for 
another  person  in  the  performance  of  any  other  sacrifices  .  .  . 

P.  296,  1.  3  from  bottom.     Read, —  Upavasatha. 

P.  394-98,  paragraphs  4-9  ;  11.     Read, — repels  recurrent  death. 
,,      1.  5  from  bottom.     Read, — tasyahutayaj  (!). 

PART  III. 

Introduction,  page  xii,  line  27.     Read, — pa^ubandha. 

P.  xvi,  1.  II  of  notes.     After — 6'yaita-saman,  add  (II,  161-2). 

P.  xviii,  1.  23.     In  ^at.  Br.  V,  5,  3,  4,  the  Shor/a^in  is  distinctly  mentioned  as 

forming  part  of  the  Kej-avapaniya  Atiratra. 
P.  xviii,  1.  4  of  notes.     Read, — '  form '  instead  of  '  from.' 
P.  XXV,  note.     Add, — So  also  .9at.  Br.  V,  3,  4,  12  ;  4,  3,  2. 
P.  38,  1.  I.     Read, — Va^aprasaviya. 
P.  62,   1.    22.     Read, — (as   it  undoubtedly  docs  in  V,  4,  3,  18  ;    as  well   a,s 

savyash//^a,  in  Atharva-v.  VIII,  8,  23). 
„    end  of  note.     Add,— In  ^'at.  Br.  V,  4,  3,  23,  sawgrahitr^'  certainly  means 

'  charioteer.' 
P.  II 3,  1.  8.     The  chant  here  alluded  to  is  the  first  (or  Hotr«'s)  P^sh^/^a-stotra, 

for  which  see   part   ii,    p.    339.     The   AbhisheZ&aniya    being,    however, 

performed    on    the   Ukthya,  not  on  the  Agnish/oma,  model,  this   stotra, 

on  the  present  occasion,  consists  of  the  Brjhat-saman  (see  Introduction, 

pp.  xvi,  note  2  ;  xxvi). 
P.  136,  1.  4.     Read, — Barhishada/i. 
P.  140,  last  line  of  text.     For  '  Ara«i '  read  '  Aruwi.' 
P.  169,  1.  18.     Read, — '  Those  kindling-sticks  .... 
P.  171, 1.  2.     Read, — Ashar//n. 
P.  203, 1.  10.     Read, — '  vak '  (voice\ 
P.  265,  note  2.     In  the  passage  of  the  Ait.  Br.  referred  to,  the  Vishuvat  day  is 

the  central  day  of  an  Ekaviwjaratra,  or  twenty-o;ie  days'  performance. 
P.  352,  1.  10.     Read, — '  sand  '  for  '  seed.' 
P.  360,  note  I.     Add,— .See  also  VIII,  7,  3,  19,  where  that  thread  is  identifud 

with  the  wind. 
P.  363,  note  I.     The  reference  is  wrong  ;  for  the  real  Satya-faman.  see  part  iv, 

p.  145,  note  T. 
.    67,  1.  24.     In  the  opposite  direction,  i.e.  in  the  direction,  away  from  us. 

D  d  3 


406  ^ATAPATHA-BRAHMAiVA. 

P.  369,  note  I.     The  reference  is  wrong ;  for  the  real  A'itra-saman,  see  part  iv, 

p.  145,  note  I. 
P-  379>  !•  10.     Read, — the  breath  serves  everything  liere. 

„      I.  20.     For  this  Saman,  based  on  the  word  *bhus,'  see  part  iv,  p.  145, 

note  I. 
P.  404,  1.  15.     Read, — having  pre-eminently  endowed  the  man  with  power, 

he  sets  him  up.     Cf.  VIII,  7,  2,  3. 
P.  415,  1.  4.     Read,— XIII,  53. 


TRANSLITERATION    OF    ORIENTAL   ALPHABETS.      407 


CO 

O 

< 

H 


P4 

H 

n 

crt 

in 

<: 

Q 

w 

W 

u 

H 

0 

H 

p 

fc, 

<5 

0 

f^ 

rn 

H 

W 

< 

i4 

0 
0 

CL, 

-) 

« 

< 

-< 

H 

(J 

< 

w 

E 

k: 

E- 

0 

fe 

tL, 

0 

0 

2; 

0 

•—1 

H 

<i 

Pi 

M 

H 

1— 1 

.J 

C/2 

^ 

< 

PJ 

1) 

(O 

V 

g 
U 

•  •             • 

-^    5      •      •      • 

•  •             • 

•                                  •            •            •             • 

j£     •      •      •      ' 

■«  2     •     •    • 

9                                               •        «        • 

1 

n  n  '^  *-«  n. 

'-    n  5i  c  ^  1= 

»                             •        •        «        ■        • 

•  •        •        •        • 

•  •        •        •        • 

•< 

•  •         • 

D      •     •     •  "D 

•  •           • 

"     -  -    kJoJ-U  ^ 

•         •                            • 

•                      • 

:   -  _  uoj-u 

'                U:)   *.    Ut>J  j 

u 

ic 
•J 

«N   q    *10si     • 

'         5? 

y-.^iW 

A 

•                        •            * 

a 
u 

If    15    K-    p-     .       |w       lu/ 

« 

t!r  10  p;-  P^  rr 

J 

M 

< 
X 
a 
>J 
•< 

> 

< 

0 
\n 

0 

>          • 

i 

u 

.-*.-*            ^  :3   *,  t»  '^ 

L    u 

•a                             • 

CONSONANTS. 

• 
0 

i-H 

*j      < 
■<-> 

1/ 

C 

W 

'a, 

0 

>          •        •         •         .           C3 

-4-» 

>       •       •       •        o3 

■=    .2     §     -       cfl    d 

i  S  S  -s    -^^ 

f  c2  '^  ;s    as 
s-1  ^1   s|  . 

=     :     r     =     ~-     :g^    5 

c^    0    --    'M                  f;^ 

■2    .2 

•*               • 

1— I      rm 

408       TRANSLITERATION    OF    ORIENTAL    ALniAEETS 


< 

X 

< 

< 

7- 

O 


\i 


•      C    — . 


g;  q    .  r  r    •  «nj^ 


'b 


'h  '->        D 


p  c; 


0   ^ 


init,. 


?  -S       2-^ 


r=  17 


•o     "D-^ 


•o      D-O 


<^Qr 


fir    ?7 


^-^ 


ri^  re  fS 


03  •         N 


,D    D    "    M 


n 


fr 


•-N    Is 


"b^ 


V^ 


^ 


■  ^     *s       M 


O 

?-. 

O 

u 


O 


g 


S    .2 

3 


C5     O 
.—I     OI 


c3       ^ 


CO         oj 

03     -=. 


CO 
O 
t— ( 

d 
© 


H 
Q 


ff}      to 

eS      o3 


03       CIS 


■3 


N       N- 


cf)        •      N 


-X     -^     (M 


C       G 


as 
_      p 


=^    =-    c     — 


07 

3 


C/} 


^     CI 


(M(M(M(M(M(M(MCOCO0000COCO 


CO    n 


FOR  THE  SACRED  BOOKS  uF  THE  EAST.   409 


a 


ci  fii  n  n 


E    ^ 


n 


J  ^ 


-> 


-a  jj 


o 

e3 

o  oT 

CO     ^ 

m   bJD 

"  -^ 
d  ^ 

n 


:  :c?^ 


-> 


3^- 


1 


<5 


5) 


1 


5) 


<J 


^ 


rv 


8- 


-s 


n 


<j> 


V? 


--«  « 


;.-3 


^ 


K>    K>    l»    K?    ^    •*' 


p-  t?  tD-  a: 


■«   =s 


P  T'  r* 


-a  jQ 

to        N 


c:,  -^    ^ 


03 
u 

«3     S 


Qj         OQ 


CO     05 

CO    CO 


«3 

;-; 

' ' 

ri 

i) 

-     a 

^ 

y. 

ai 
o 

o 

> 

"6 

u 
V2 


c3 


C/3 


C 
<u 


m 

Q 

r-l 

e8 

•t-4 

Hi 


s  ^  I 


OJ 

C-i 

t<. 

d      5 


3 


—   'c 


a 

73 


•        00 


tc 

CO         t-» 

C3 


CM     CO     Tt<     »0     CO     t^ 

^4      ^^      ^}^      ^J^      ^^      ^^ 


oooio»-iiMco'^»not^oooi 


4IO       TRANSLITERATION    OF    ORIENTAL    ALPHABETS. 


Chinese. 

)rj 

....                                                       ^^_,,                      ..... 

•  S3     <cS     •'-     <-"        •        .        •        •      3     <3      0)     <«     <£S        .       •      0        *     <rt        *        '        *        •     -3 

•  ....                                            'a]       ••••••• 

X 

..       . 

1     1  »••»-•      •       •       •       •       ••'  r-      :•      :       •       •       •       i-  .>- 

(J 
15 
2 
< 

:  ,  ^  .  Lj, :  :  :  :.  .j^  :  iji^  :  :  :  :;!^  :  :  :  :  :  : 

V 

•                           ••••                ••           ••••           ••••• 

• 
• 
• 

i 

a. 
a. 

p  s 

(W.S^'O .^.<^....«- 

• 
• 

c 

•  .  •  •        S?/  ...        ^ 

:;:??-  ^  ::::  -  '>s^^  :  :  :^^^  :::::: 
••••       w^***       3^ 

•     •                                                             •                •»•                •••••• 

5 

n 
< 

X 
D. 

< 
>•  ■ 

a! 

2 

O 

(In 
to 

S 

•  •             • 

•  •             • 

•  •             • 

.      •      .    '~^     •    ' —     .....   ^"^     .          ^ —     ...          ~ — '     .      .      • 

• 
• 
• 

1* 
u 

.o       ^  'B'       '3'       '3"^" 

0     w    50     03    <(8    —    ■«    S3    ^2    ■?!    t      S    «3      <u    ^  iS    ^  ^O     0     c3     3    »J^50^    :cs    :-    ..o 

to 

CO 

1 

1 

i 

to 

(M 

»           • 

0 
a? 

■ 

6 

"^                                       •- 

.....                  '^                     ..'3 

:             "  s?n  ?*       -  c^  -^ 

::::::::::::  ^  g'  p  -  s  •>  w)  0  ;:  : 

.2 
"^ 

3 

QJ 

..: ^03          SS3 

in 

J 
J) 

o 

> 

;i  Liaryngo-paiatans 

3  „         labialis 

4  Gutturalis  brevis 

5  „          longa 

6  Palatalis  brevis  . 

7  „         longa  . 

8  Dentalis  brevis  . 

9  „        longa   . 

10  Lingualis  brevis 

1 1  „          longa 

12  Labialis  brevis  .  . 

13  „       longa    .  . 

14  Gutturo-palatahs 
15 

1 6  Diphthongus  gutt 

17 

18 

19  Gutturo-labialis  b 

20  ..             1( 

21  Diphthongus  guti 
22 

23 

24  Gutturalis  fraotn   . 

C 

OXFORD 

PRINTED   AT  THE  CLARENDON    PRESS 

BY   HORACE    HART,   M.  A. 

PRINTER   TO   THE    UNIVERSITY 


Sacred  Books  of  the  East 

TRANSLATED    BY 

VARIOUS   ORIENTAL   SCHOLARS 

AND    EDITED   BY 

F.       MAX     MULLER. 

,^*^   This  Series  is  published  with  the  sanction  and  co-opei  atio)i  of  the  Secretary  of 

State  for  India  in  Council. 


REPORT    presented   to   the  ACADXSMIE   DES    INSCRIFTIOITS,    Slay   11, 

1883,  by  M.  ERNEST   RENAN. 

'  M.    Renan    prescnlc    Irois    iiouvcaux  une  seconde,  doiit  I'interet  historic|ue   et 

volumes    de    la    grande    collection    des  religieiix  ne  seia  pas  moindre.     M.  Max 

"  Livres    sacrcs    de    I'Orient"     (Sacred  Miiller  a  sn  se  procurer  la  collaboration 

Books  of  the  East  ,  que  dirige  a  Oxford,  des  savans  les  plus  t'niinens  d'Eurnpe  et 

avec  une  si  vaste  erudition  et  une  critique  d'Asie.     L'Universite  d'Oxford,  que  cette 

si  sure,   le  savant  associe   de   I'Academie  grande  publication  honore  au  plus  haut 

des  Inscriptions,  M.  Max  Miiller.  ...  La  degre,  doit  lenir  a  conlinuer  dans  les  plus 

premiere  serie  de  ce  beau   recueil,  com-  larges  proportions  une  oeuvre  aussi  philo- 

posee  de  24  volumes,  est  presque  achevee.  sophiquement     coneue     que     savamment 

M.   Max  Miiller  se  propose  d'en  publier  exccutee.' 

EXTRACT  from  the  QUARTERI.Y  REVIEW. 

'  We    rejoice  to    notice   that  a   second  great  edition  of  the  l\ig-V'eda,  can  com- 

serics  of  tiiese  translations  has  been  an-  pare  in  importance  or  in  usefulness  with 

nounced  and  has  actually  begun  to  appear.  tliis    English    translation    of    tlie    Sacred 

The  stones,  at  least,  out  of  which  a  stately  Books  of  the  East,  which  lias  been  devised 

edifice  may  hereafter  arise,  are  here  being  by  his  foresight,  successfully  brought  so 

brought  together.     Prof.  Max  Miiller  has  far    by    his    jiersu.Tsive    and     organising 

deserved  well  of  scieniific  history.     Not  power,  and   will,  we  trust.  I))'  the  assist- 

a  few  minds   owe  to  his  enticing  words  ance  of  the  distinguished  scholars  he  lias 

their   first   attraction   to   this   branch    of  gathered    round  him,   be  carried   in  due 

study.     But  no  work  of  his,  not  even  the  time  to  a  ha]i]iy  comiiletion.' 

Professor  E.HARDY,  Inaugural  Iiectiire  in  the  University  ofFreiburg-,  1887. 

'  Die  allgemeine  vcrgleichcnde  Reli-  internationalcn  Orientalistencongrcss  in 
gionswissenschaft  datirt  von  jenem  gross-  London  der  Grundstcin  gelcgt  worden 
arligen,  in  seiner  Art  einzig  dastehenden  war,  die  Ubcrsctzung  derheiligen  lUicher 
Unternehmen,  zu  welclicm  auf  Anregung  des  Ostens'  {the  Sacred  Books  of  the 
Max    Miiller-;    im    Jr\hie    l^Jy.f    auf    deni       East). 

The  Hon.  ALBERT  S.  G.  CANNING,  '  Words  on  Existing  Religions.' 

'  The  recent  publication  of  the  "  Sacred       a  great  event  in  tlie  nnnals  of  theological  • 
liooks  of  the  East"  in  English  is  surely       literature.' 

Oxfotb 

AT    THE    CLARENDON    PRESS 

LONDON:    HENRY    FRoWDK 

OXFORD    UNIVERSITY    PRESS   WAREHOUSl':,    AMlsN    CORNlCk.    E.G. 


SACRED  BOOKS  OF  THE  EAST: 


FIRST    SKRIKS. 

Vol.  I.     The  Upanishads. 

Translated  by  F.  Max  Muller.  Part  I.  The  JTMndogya- 
upanishad,  The  Talavakara-upanishad,  The  Aitareya-arawyaka, 
The  Kaushitaki-brahmawa-upanishad,  and  The  Va^asaneyi- 
sa;;/hila-upanishad.     8vo,  cloth,  \os.  6d. 

The  Upanishads  cotitam  ihe  philosophy  of  the  Veda.  They  have 
become  ihe  foundation  of  ihe  laier  Veddnta  doctrines,  and  indirectly 
of  Buddhis7n.  Schopenhauer,  speaking  of  the  Upanishads,  says  : 
'  In  the  whole  world  there  is  no  study  so  beneficial  and  so  elevating 
as  that  of  ihe  Upajiishads.  It  has  been  the  solace  of  ?ny  life,  it  will 
he  ihe  solace  of  my  death! 

[See  also  Vol.  XV.] 

A 

Vol.  II.     The  Sacred  Laws  of  the  Aryas, 

As  taught  in  the  Schools  of  Apastamba,  Gautama,  Vasish//;a, 
and  Baudhayana.  Translated  by  Georg  Buhler.  Part  I. 
Apastamba  and  Gautama.    Second  Edition.    8vo,  cloth,  icy.  6d. 

The  Sacred  Latvs  of  the  Aryas  contain  the  original  treatises  on 
ivhich  the  Laws  of  Man u  and  other  latvgivers  ivere  founded. 

[See  also  Vol.  XIV.] 

Vol.  III.     The  Sacred   Books  of  China. 

The  Texts  of  Confucianism.  Translated  by  James  Legge. 
Part  I.  The  Shu  King,  The  Religious  Portions  of  the  Shih 
King,  and  The  Hsiao  King.     8vo,  cloth,  1 2s.  6d. 

Coffucius  was  a  collector  of  aitcieni  traditions,  not  ihe  founder  of 
a  new  religion.     As  he  lived  in  the  sixth  arid  fifth  centuries  B.  C. 
his  works  are  of  unique  interest  for  the  study  of  Ethology. 
[See  also  Vols.  XVI,  XXVII,  XXVIII,  XXXIX,  and  XL.] 

Vol.  IV.     The  Zend-Avesta. 

Translated  by  James  Darmesteter.  Part  I.  The  Vendldad. 
Second  Edition.     8 vo,  cloth,  i^s. 

The  Zend-Avesta  contains  the  relics  of  what  was  the  religion  of 
Cyrus,  Darius,  and  Xerxes,  and,  but  for  the  battle  of  Marathon, 


EDITED  BY  F.   MAX  MULLER. 


might  have  become  the  religmi  of  Europe.  It  forms  to  the  present 
day  the  sacred  hook  of  the  Par  sis,  the  so-called  fire-worshippers. 
Tivo  more  volumes  will  complete  the  traJislatioti  of  all  that  is  left  us 
of  Zoroaster's  religion. 

[See  also  Vols.  XXIII  and  XXXI.] 

Vol.  v.     Pahlavi  Texts. 

Translated  by  E.  W.  West.     Part  I.     The  Bundahi^-,  Bahman 
Ya^t,  and  Shayast  la-shayast.     8vo,  cloth,  i  zs.  6d. 

The  Pahlavi  Texts  comprise  the  theological  literature  of  the  revival 
of  Zoroaster  s  religion,  beginning  zvith  the  Sassanian  dynasty.  They 
are  important  for  a  study  of  Gnosticism. 

Vols.  VI  and  IX.     The  Quran. 

Parts  I  and  II.     Translated  by  E.  H.  Palmer.     8vo,  cloth,  2\s. 

This  translation,  carried  out  according  to  his  own  peculiar  viezvs 
of  the  origin  of  the  Qw'dn,  was  the  last  great  work  ofE.  H.  Palmer, 
before  he  zvas  ynurdered  in  Egypt. 

Vol.  VII.     The   Institutes  of  Vish;«u. 

Translated  by  Julius  Jolly.     8vo,  cloth,  lo^-.  dd. 

A  collcctio7i  of  legal  aphorisms,  closely  connected  with  one  of  the 
oldest  Vedic  schools,  the  KaMas,  but  considerably  added  to  in  later 
time.     Of  irnportance  for  a  critical  study  of  the  Laws  of  Manu. 

Vol.  VIII.    The  Bhagavaclgita,with  The  Sanatsu^atiya, 
and  The  Anugita. 

Translated   by    Kashinath    Trimbak    Tklang.      Svo,    cloth, 
\os.  (id. 

The  earliest  philosophical  and  religious  poem  of  India.  It  has  been 
paraphrased  in  Arnold's  'Song  Celestial.' 

Vol.  X.     The  Dhammapada, 

Translated  from  Pali  by  E.  Max  Muller  ;  and 

The  Sutta-Nipata, 
Translated  from  Pali  by  V.  Fausboll  ;  being  Canonical  Books 
of  the  Buddhists.     Svo,  cloth,  los.  6d. 

The  Dhaynmapada  contains  the  quintessence  of  Buddhist  morality. 
The  Sutta-Nipdia  gives  the  authentic  teaching  of  Buddha  on  some 
of  the  fundame7ital  principles  of  religion. 


4  SACRED  BOOKS  OF  THE  EAST: 


VOL.  XI.     Buddhist  Suttas. 

Translated  from  Pali  by  T.  W.  Rhys  Davids,  i.  Tlie  Maha- 
parinibbana  Sutlanta ;  2.  The  Dhamma^-zl'akka-ppavattana 
Sutta.  3.  The  Tevi^^aSuttanta;  4.  The  Akahkheyya  Sutta ; 
5.  The  A'etokhila  Sutta;  6.  The  Maha-sudassana  Suttanta; 
7.  The  Sabbasava  Sutta.     8vo,  cloth,  10^.  dd. 

A  coUeclmi  of  the  most  important  religious,  inoral,  and  philosophical 
discourses  taken  fro?Ji  the  sacred  canon  of  the  Buddhists. 

Vol.  XII.     The  ^'atapatha-Brahmawa,  accordhig  to  the 

Text  of  the  Madhyandina  School. 

Translated  by  Juuus  Eggf.ling.  Part  I.  Books  I  and  H. 
8vo,  cloth,  i2.r.  6(7. 

A    minute  accoujit  of  the  sacrificial  ceremonies  of  the    Vedic  age. 
It  co7itains  the  earliest  account  of  the  Deluge  in  India. 
[See  also  Vols.  XXVI,  XLL] 

Vol.  XIII.     Vinaya  Texts. 

Translated  from  the  Pali  by  T.  W.  Rhys  Davids  and  Hermann 
Oldenberg.  Part  L  The  Patimokkha.  The  Mahavagga,  I-IV. 
8vo,  cloth,  \os.  (id. 

The  Vinaya  Texts  give  for  the  first  tijue  a  translation  of  the  moral 
code  of  the  Buddhist  religion  as  settled  in  the  third  century  B.  C. 
[See  also  Vols.  XVII  and  XX.] 

A 

Vol.  XIV.     The  Sacred  Laws  of  the  Aryas, 

As  taught  in  the  Schools  of  Apastainba,  Gautama,  Vasish//;a, 
and  Baudhayana.  Translated  by  Georg  Buhler.  Part  II. 
Vasish//?a  and  Baudhayana.     Svo,  cloth,  los.  6d. 

Vol.  XV.     The   Upanishads. 

Translated  by  F.  Max  Muller.  Part  II.  The  Ka//^a-upanishad, 
The  Mu/zfl'aka-upanishad,  The  Taittiriyaka-upanishad,  The 
BnTiadaraKyaka-upanishad,  The  6Veta.yvatara-upanishad,  The 
Praj';7a-upanishad,  and  The  Maitraya??a-brahma;/a-upanishad. 
Svo,  cloth,  10^.  dd. 

Vol.  XVI,     The  Sacred  Books  of   China. 

The   Texts   of  Confucianism.     Translated  by  James   Legge. 
Part  II.     The  Yi  King.     Svo,  cloth,  los.  6d. 
[See  also  Vols.  XXVII,  XXVIII.] 

Vol.  XVII.     Vinaya  Texts. 

Translated  from  the  Pali  by  T.  W.  Rhys  Davids  and  Hermann 
Oldenberg.  Part  II.  The  Mahavagga,  V-X.  The  A'ullavagga, 
I-III.     Svo,  cloth,  los.  ()d. 


EDITED  BY  F.  MAX  MULLER. 


VOL.  XVIII.     Pahlavi  Texts. 

Translated  by  E.  W.  West.  Part  II.  The  Daa'istan-i  Dinik 
and  The  Epistles  of  ManiuX'ihar.     8vo,  cloth,  \2s.  dd. 

Vol.  XIX.     The  Fo-sho-hino-tsan-kine. 

A  Life  of  Buddha  by  Ajvaghosha  Bodhisattva,  translated  from 
Sanskrit  into  Chinese  by  Dharmaraksha,  a.d.  420,  and  from 
Chinese  into  Englisli  by  Samuel  Beal.     8vo,  cloth,  \os.  Gd. 

This  life  of  Buddha  was  Iranslakd  from  Sanskril  iftio  Chinese, 
A.D.  420.  //  contains  many  legends,  some  of  ivhich  show  a  certain 
similarity  to  /he  Evangelium  infantiae,  Sfc. 

Vol.  XX.     Vinaya  Texts. 

Translated  from  the  Pali  by  T.  W.  Rhys  Davids  and  Hermann 
Oldenberg.  Part  III.  The  A'ullavagga,  IV-XII.  8vo,  cloth, 
ici'.  6r/. 

Vol.  XXI.     The  Saddharma-pu;^rt^arika  ;  01-,  The  Lotus 
of  the  True  Law. 

Translated  by  H.  Kern.     8vo,  cloth,  \2s.  6d. 

'  The  Lotus  of  the  true  Law'  a  canonical  book  of  the  Northern 
Buddhists,  translated  from  Sanslr/t.  There  is  a  Chinese  transla- 
tion of  this  book  which  was  finished  as  early  as  the  year  286  A.D. 

Vol.  XXII.     G'aina-Sutras. 

Translated  from  Prakrit  by  Hkkjiann  Jacobi.  Part  I.  The 
AHrahga-Sfitra  and  The  Kalpa-Siitra.     8vo,  cloth,  los.  6d. 

The  religion  of  the  Cainas  was  founded  by  a  contemporary  of  Buddha. 
It  still  counts  numerous  adherents  in  India,  while  there  are  no 
Buddhists  left  in  India  proper. 

[See  Vol.  XLV.] 

VOL.  XXIII.     The  Zend-Avesta. 

Translated  by  James  Darmesteter.  Part  II.  The  Sirozahs, 
Yajts,  and  Nyayij.     8vo,  cloth,  loj.  6^/. 

Vol.  XXIV.     Pahlavi  Texts. 

Translated  by  E.  W.  West.  Part  III.  Dina-i  Mainog- 
Khira</,  .Vikand-gftmanik  Vi^ar,  and  Sad  Dar.  8vo,  cloth, 
lo.v.  bd. 


SACRED  BOOKS  OF  THE  EAST: 


SECOND   SERIES. 

VOL.  XXV.     Manu. 

Translated  by  Georg  Buhler.  8vo,  clolh,  2\s. 
This  translation  is  founded  on  that  of  Sir  William  foiics,  which 
has  hen  carefully  revised  and  corrected  zvith  the  help  of  seven  native 
Commentaries.  An  Appendix  contains  all  the  quotations  from  Manu 
which  are  found  in  the  Hindu  Laiv-bootis,  translated  for  the  use  of 
the  Law  Courts  in  India.  Another  Appendix  gives  a  syjiopsis  of 
parallel  passages  from  the  six  Dharma-siitras,  the  other  Smx'dis, 
the  Upani shads,  the  Mahdbhdrata,  6;c. 

Vol.  XXVI.     The  6atapatha-Brahma;/a. 

Translated  by  Julius  Eggeling.  Part  II.  Books  III  and  IV. 
8vo,  cloth,  125'.  dd. 

Vols.  XXVII  and  XXVIII.  The  Sacred  Books  of  Chhia. 

The  Texts  of  Confucianism.  Translated  by  James  Legge.  Parts 
III  and  IV.  The  Li  K\,  or  Collection  of  Treatises  on  the  Rules 
of  Propriety,  or  Ceremonial  Usages.     8vo,  cloth,  25^. 

Vol.   XXIX.     The    Gr/hya-Sutras,     Rules    of    Vedic 
Domestic  Ceremonies. 

Part  I.  ^S'ankhayana,  A.yvalayana,  Paraskara,  Khadira.  Trans- 
lated by  Hermann  Oldenberg.  8vo,  cloth,  12.?.  (yd. 
These  rules  of  Domestic  Ceremonies  describe  the  twme  life  of  the 
ancient  Aryas  with  a  completeness  and  accuracy  unmatcJml  in  any 
other  literature.  Some  of  these  rules  have  been  incorporaled  in  the 
ancient  Law-books. 

VOL.    XXX.     The     Gr2hya-Sutras,     Rules    of    Vedic 
Domestic  Ceremonies, 

Part  II.  Gobhila,,  Hira;^/yakejin,  Apastamba.  Translated  by 
Hermann  Oldenberg.  Apastamba,  Ya^;7a-paribhasha-sutras. 
Translated  by  F.  Max  Muller.     8vo,  cloth,  \2s.  6d. 

VOL.  XXXI.     The  Zend-Avesta. 

Part  III.  The  Yasna,  Yisparad,  Afrinagan,  Gahs,  and 
Miscellaneous  Fragments.  Translated  by  L.  H.  Mills.  8vo, 
cloth,  \2S.  6d. 

Vol.  XXXII.     Vedic  Hymns. 

Translated  by  F,  Max  Muller.     Part  I.     8vo,  cloth,  i9,s.  dd. 

VOL.  XXXIII.     The  Minor  Law-books. 

Translated  by  Julius  Jolly.  Part  I.  Narada,  Br/liaspati. 
Bvo,  cloth,  \os.  6d. 


EDITED  BY  F.  MAX  MOLLER. 


Vol.  XXXIV.     The    Vedanta-Sutras,    with    the    Com- 
mentary by  KSahkara/^arya.     Part  I. 

Translated  by  G.  Thibaut.     8vo,  cloth,  \2s.  6d. 

VOLS.  XXXV  AND  XXXVI.     The    Questions  of  King 

Mihnda. 

Translated  from  the  Pali  by  T.  W.  Rhys  Davids. 
Part  I.     8vo,  cloth,  lo^'.  6d.      Part  II.     8vo,  cloth,  12s.  Gd. 

VOL.  XXXVII.     Pahlavi  Texts. 

Translated  by  E,  \V.  West.  Part  IV.  The  Contents  of  the 
Nasks,  as  stated  in  the  Eighth  and  Ninth  Books  of  the  Dinkard. 
Bvo,  cloth,  \^s. 

VOL.  XXXVIII.     The  Vedanta-Sutras.     Part  II.    8vo, 

cloth,  with  full  Index  to  both  Parts,  1 2^.  6d. 

Vols.  XXXIX  and  XL.     The  Sacred  Books  of  China. 

The  Texts  of  Taoism.  Translated  by  James  Legge.  Svo, 
cloth,  2\S. 

Vol.  XLI.      The    ^'atapatha- Brahma;/a.       Part    III. 

Translated  by  Julius  Eggeling.     Svo,  cloth,  12s.  6d. 

Vol.   XLII.      Hymns  of  the  Atharva-veda. 

Translated  by  M.  Bloomfield.     Svo,  cloth,  21s. 

Vols.  XLlll  and  xliv.     The    ^'atapatha-Brahma/^a. 

Parts  IV  and  V.  [In  the  Press.] 

VOL.  XLV.   The  (S^aina-Sutras. 

Translated  from  Prakr/t,  by  Hermann  Jacobi.  Part  II.  The 
Uttaradhyayana  Sutra,  The  Sutrakr/tahga  Sutra.  Svo,  cloth, 
12s.  6d. 

Vol.   xlvi.    Vcdic  Hymns.    Part  II.    Svo,  cloth,  I4<r. 

Vol.  XLVII.      Pahlavi  Texts. 

Translated  by  E.  W.  West.  Part  V.  Marvels  of  Zoroas- 
trianism.     Svo,  cloth,  8j.  6d. 

Vol.  XLVIII.      Ramaniii,''a's  ^'ribhashya. 

Translated  by  G.  Thibaut.  [hi preparation.] 

Vol.  XLIX.      Buddhist    Mahayana    Texts.      Buddha- 

X-arita,  translated  by  E.  B.  Coweli..  Sukhavali-vyuha,Va^'-ra/(-X7/e- 
dikii,  &c.,  translated  by  F.  Max  Muller.  Amitayur-Dhyana- 
Suira,  translated  by  J.  Takakusu.      Svo,  clolli.  \2s.  Gd. 


8  RECENT  ORIENTAL    WORKS. 


ARYAN    SERIES. 
Buddhist  Texts  from  Japan.     I.  Va^ra/^/^/^edika  ;   The 

Diamond-  Cutter. 

Edited  by  F.  Max  Muller,  M.A.     Small  4to,  3^.  6d. 
One  of  the  most  famous  metaphysical  treatises  of  the  Mahayana  Buddhists. 

Buddhist  Texts  from  Japan.  II.  Sukhavati-Vyuha  : 
Description  of  Suhhavati,  the  Land  of  Bliss. 

Edited  by  F.  Max  Muller,  M.A.,  and  Bunyiu  Nanjio.     Willi 

two  Appendices  :  (i)  Text  and  Translation  of  Sanghavarman's 

Chinese   Version  of  the   Poetical  Portions  of  the  Sukhavati- 

Vyuha  ;    (2)  Sanskrit  Text  of  the  Smaller  Sukhavati-Vyuha. 

Small  4to,  ']S.  6c/. 

The  edifio  princeps  of  the  Sacred  Book  of  one  of  the  largest  and   most 

influential  seels  of  Buddhism,  numbering  more  than  ten  millions  of  followers 

in  Japan  alone. 

Buddhist  Texts  from  J  a  pan.  III.  The  A  ncient  Palm- 
Leaves  containing  the  Pra^77a-Paramita-Hr/daya- 
Sutra  and  the  Ush/^isha-Vic''aya-Dhara//i. 

Edited  by  F.  Max  xMuller,  M.A.,  and  Bunyiu  Nanjio,  M.A. 
With  an  Appendix  by  G.  Buhler,  CLE.     With  many  Plates. 
Small  4to,  lo^. 
Contains  facsimiles  of  the  oldest  Sanskrit  MS.  at  present  known. 

Dharma-Sa;/2gTaha,  an  Ancient  Collection  of  Buddhist 
Technical  Term-s. 

Prepared  for  publication  by  Kenjiu  Kasawara,  a  Buddhist 
Priest  from  Japan,  and,  after  his  death,  edited  by  F.  Max 
Muller  and  H.  Wenzel.     Small  4to,  7^.  (yd. 

Katyay ana's  Sarvanukrama/n  of  the  7?/gveda. 

With  Extracts  from  Shac/guru.fishya's  Commentary  entitled 
Vedanhadipika.  Edited  by  A.  A.  Macdonell,  M.A.,  Ph.D.   i6.r. 

The  Mantrapatha,  or  the  Pfayer  Pook  of  the  Apa- 
stambins. 

Edited,  together  wiih  the  Commentary  of  Haradatta,  and 
translated  by  M.  Winternitz,  Ph.D.  First  Part.  Introduc- 
tion, Sanskrit  Text,  Varietas  Lectionis,  and  Appendices. 
Small  quarto,  \os.  f)d. 

AT     THE     CLARENDON     PRESS 

LONDON :     HENRY   FROWDE 

OXFORD   UNIVERSITY   PRESS   WAREHOUSE,  AMEN   CORNER,   E.G. 


DATE  DUE 


JOW  1|5  my 


DEMCO  38-297 


